Q31
Are there any moderate or significant perceived strengths of our field you would like to add? Please share here (optional):
A core group of dysphagia and aphasia therapists are driving change and EBP 

Versatility (e.g., can work in many settings)
Our field as a whole is well-intended/altrusitic. That's a strength.
Interaction between clinician and researchers is accessible 
There is a lot of room for our field to grow drill down so we (and others) will know exactly what we do.
significant perceived strength of SLP/CSD--> feeling good, service, helping others
N/a
No
Na
I have been lucky to have some truly incredible mentorship in our field. I think there are many SLPs who seek to make the field better and support those who are learning, even if there are a number of issues within the field and our practice patterns. 
Purpose and meaning and the ability to help others 
I love that diversity of our scope of practice. It’s great that you don’t have to be “stuck” in one area of the field for your career. 
Job growth
Our scope of practice 
the availability of jobs/employment is strength
None
Flexibility in settings and populations; ability to pivot within the profession
N/a 
Flexibility for career change
 
I love that we cover the big 9 in grad school but…
SLPs are well educated 
Devoted SLPs
Flexibility in work settings
Our rehab skills of: ability to actively listen to patient needs and focus on strengths as we manage caseloads.
Flexibility to work in a variety of environments and schedules
The cognitive load, productivity expectations, lack of appropriate pay, lack of support from our national association, and an overall lack of advocacy is a significant weakness to this field. It’s hard for me to recommend anyone become an SLP because I see first hand how difficult it is and unrewarding it can be sometimes. I love my job and I love what I do but I definitely consider leaving the field more often than I expected myself to when I first started going to school to be an SLP. 
Not really.   Feel we are way behind PT and OT with aknowlegement and respect.   Always the ugly step sister. 
Newfound focus on executive function and social medial allowing for the sharing of ideas between all professions (since we don’t receive input from other fields during graduate school). 
Clinician- researcher gap 
Flexibility 
Strength: amount of research coming out in recent years
I do feel that I have been fortunate to have amazing mentors in my years of practice. One particular mentor who has been an SLP for many years helped me to become the clinician I am now, and one who wants to continue growing and learning. 
The emerging generation of SLPs appear to be determined to create change in the field. 
Generally, those in our field seem to be creative and hard-working. We want the best for our students and clients.
Collaboration among professionals 
Most SLPs that I have met have passion for helping people and take particular interest in areas and take course to specialize/learn more on their own.
I appreciate the direction our field is taking towards instrumentation for dysphagia
I believe this is a beautiful field. How fortunate are we to get to assist people in habilitation and rehabilitation or communication and eating/feeding/swallowing. 
Processes of soliciting member feedback for improvement and concerns 
broad scope of practice for SLPs 
None 
Versatility of settings and populations, flexibility of settings and schedule
just how badass we are 
Job security 
caring about patients
The knowledge base we have is often beyond most professions with which we collaborate. 
The desire to do best by our patients 
Overall lack if advocacy for services and/or advocacy for equitable pay relative to caseload size, demand, and stress level.
There are many good researchers, professors, and SLPs in the field. They have been my role models during my career. 
In my opinion, the opportunity to change settings or populations served is a moderate strength. 
I think you covered them.
Many SLPs I know are committed to learning and furthering education.
Our field values integrity 
Encroachment by ABA into the field of communication.
Strength is the ability to help others in all age groups across a range of needs (this field is always interesting!)
Diversity of work settings 
Flexibility and availability of jobs
variety of scenarios to work
The paradigm shift we are seeing with the 8% gives me hope that we don’t have to maintain the status quo, can/will do better! 
Opportunity to work with any age in multiple settings
Opportunities to cultivate a focus/specialty area & opportunities to advocate for others’ personal autonomy re: communication/deglutition.
The field offers knowledge in many areas of communication difficulty
I love what I do. In person, SLPs are wonderful colleagues and friends. Some of us are a bit much online. 
flexibility of SLPs to serve a variety of needs
Although it takes a good amount of education, I believe it’s a strength to have multiple areas of knowledge and expertise within our field. 
Excellent training for CFs
Flexibility with moving between settings
Strengths would be community support when I reach out to SLPs I always get support and encouragement.
SLPs seem to just be surviving, vs providing high quality care. The potential is there, it's just diluted 
Ability to change settings.
Job security
Communication
SLPs are smart, passionate, innovative life changers.
Variety of work environments - including early intervention programs which don’t fit into the “medical, private practice, or education” models. EI programs are unique and SLPs are in demand, work with a team, and have options with benefits.
Adding the clinical doctorate is important to improving education. Hopefully this will become required and will improve our autonomy within medical speech pathology .
The abundance of SLP jobs out there. It is very easy to get a job as an SLP (though I wouldn’t accept 75% of the jobs available) 
While there are cliques and internal gate-keeping groups, a large number of our colleagues root for and support each other. We mentor and coach on another. We share ideas and problem-solve. 
Educational setting focus in our field - services focusing on pediatric communication deficits.  
The desire of many SLPs have demonstrated a strong drive and willingness to learn new concepts (when available w/ affordable access)
It’s been my experience that SLP’s have a significant strength in collaborative work with other fields related to patient care 
Scope of practice
Always in demand/job security 
Workplace autonomy as compared to other disciplines.
Unnecessarily high annual renweal of CCC
Data that demonstrate that we have a positive impact on our client's communication outcomes
I see people in our field increasingly aligning with the disabled people we serve, but there is still a lot of ableism in the field. 
I think our field has the breadth and capacity for depth of contributing SO much more in the settings where we already are. We often don’t get the recognition of our skills I believe, because we are so diversely trained. 
SLPs collaborating and supporting each other, 
Honestly the Reddit slp community has been very helpful. 
Too burnt out of the profession to list any.
I think SLPs have a lot of potential to make the world better
Opportunity to connect with and serve people; possessing and developing a scope of knowledge that’s relevant to everyone; 
How much SLPs care about their clients
small group of indictable working together to show EBP
The growing implementation of SLPAs should help alleviate the SLP shortage and offer a more accessible route into our field
the willingness of some people to share information and support the profession freely online
Flexibility of work settings
Cannot think of much of anything positive to say about the profession at this time. 
It’s a depressing field now. I warn people not to go into it. We are reimbursed at far lower rates than any of the other allied health professions. 
Interdisciplinary collaboration
I know faculty hires are an issue, but I think it is good that new programs are opening. It makes the field more accessible for more students. 
Lack of substitutes in schools/make up sessions not possible
the ability to change settings and have a job that looks nothing like one you may have done for years with relative ease
We have a real, valuable role to play in a changing society including communication as it relates to advancing technologies, disability and equity, and more! 
Amount of social media pages/groups aiding to bridge gaps in communication. Quite honestly I find it easier to gather information by “polling” groups regarding questions I have rather than trying to navigate asha website.
Flexibility of setting and population served
The high demand for SLPs across settings makes it an easy job to find anywhwere - very flexible as well.
Our empathy, care for our patients/students
Job availability, choice of settings
Diversity of clients treated
dedication of SLPs
The strength and resiliency of our clinicians 
I think we have a lot of flexibility. If you’re a doctor who does a residency and fellowship in a specific direction, changing your whole practice requires a lot of education and new board exams. If you’re an SLP and want to go from articulation to voice, nominally we say ethically you should go get some experience, but there’s no external qualification of that shift and no barriers to just taking those clients. I personally believe this is because the broader public and medical community see our impact or potential to harm as benign and inconsequential, which people in this field revel in (“I can do any part of SLP I want every day - even be asked to do voice, swallowing and articulation in the same school caseload! So exciting!”) but I truly believe this is the biggest signal that we are the weakest link in the pm&r tripod and confidence that we can do anything of substance would translate to Frank limits on the way we practice within our so called scope. For now, it’s pretty much open season and I do think that keeps the yield fun (it’s a positive for clinicians) but it’s a really bad reflection on the field. 
The ability to work with different age groups 
Na 
The numerous options of age groups one can work with and settings one can work in
Strength- use of mentorship and experiential learning
When we are given the time to collaborate with other professionals we achieve great things.  The number of open positions across settings does mean we always have options.  I also think the increase in teletherapy is an overall bonus for more students to access our expertise.
Job opportunities are abundant 
Cultural awareness & sensitivity is something that needs to be addressed. I feel this is an area of weaknesses and can be alleviated with more diversity in this field.
I think slps knowledge of cognition and intervention makes us essential members of admin teams
I am not sure that training is a strength or weakness as currently framed; being a generalist opens up professional mobility but weakens training. Options like a SLPD strengthen salary and extend training but may or may not actually improve the field overall I think. Similarly I am unclear about how the question of association leadership is framed -- is this about who leads asha or about asha's advocacy on behalf of the profession. 
Access to research on asha website now that we never could access before!
Setting flexibility
We are needed, though people don't know if our support
SLPs, in my experience, tend to be extremely dedicated to the care of patients.
Racism 
Flexibility in switching settings, truly meaningful work (when we're actually allowed to do it)
With the increase in social media, I feel that SLPs can find "their home" to get the most recent information and research which will also lead to a weakness listed below.  I feel the diversity of the types of things we can do to support individuals is broad and expansive which is a wonderful gift in a professions.
Flexibility in moving to different settings/age groups. 
Diversity of scope
Can change settings 
Job security/availability. I could find *something* in the field if I lost my job tomorrow, even if it wasn't as good as what I'm currently doing. 
Job security, SLPs are in demand (we should be collectively using this as leverage to demand higher pay and better working conditions)
Workloads in education and productivity expectations in health care
I think we tend to be broad concept thinkers, probably because our education is wide. I find we (in healthcare) are more likely to look at the whole picture and make recommendations based on that, rather than follow scripts and procedures. 
Over 35 years of practice, the SLPs on my staff(s) received more patient/client recognition (in the form of kudos, letters, etc) than the OT and PT providers on the team, despite being outnumbered by a factor of 3 or 4. We have significant strengths in terms of compassion and excellence in service delivery. 
Weaknesses: Clinical fellowship supervision expectation vs reality. 
Variable work (setting, population, etc)
on the job trainings
Best part of this field for me (17+ years) has been ability to find jobs in many locations and with flexible schedules
Flexibility to work in different settings/schedules
While the average salaries are accurate as listed on this survey, SLPs in many areas of the country make significantly less. Starting pay for a school SLP in Oklahoma is often less than $45,000. SLPs in these areas have difficulty finding full time employment with benefits and a reasonable wage. 
I like that we are mostly women, but we need more men bc many of our clients/students are boys. However bc we are women we are not given the recognition or pay like men. 
General knowledge education in early graduate school
We are smaller group so easier to unionize. Also we all agree we need to be paid more and our caseloads have been dumped on us without help.
I appreciate the flexibility in work settings and, therefore, in schedules. I think SLPs are a very unified group that tries to lift each other up.
Our background and expertise provides many opportunities for us to contribute widely across professional settings and make a difference in the lives of those with communication disorders/needs.   Our opinions and expertise are valued and frequently sought out across many professional settings (schools, early childhood, hospitals, rehabilitation centers etc.).
variety of work settings 
Flexibility in types of jobs
I see the flexibility to work in a variety of settings to be a significant strength
Most SLP's are very motivated and driven to help clients but stymied by broken/adversarial systems in which they have to work
Variety of job options
ASHA has amazing resources for clinicians, academics, and students. Its systems and processes are not perfect, but the information & resources are significantly better than other organizations I belong to.
I like ASHA's evidence maps (though I wouldn't pay $200+ a year for them) but The Informed SLP is absolutely awesome - it's relevant and the drawings help me with my ADHD to capture my attention.
I know I can always find a job so if I hate one position I can leave.
We are more evidence based than other therapies 
The ability to care for our patients
Their partnership with proliability is great and affordable. All clinicians should consider it. 
Job availability (even though the quality of those positions vary)
Flexibility/different types of jobs (don't always have to work a 9-5 with options like HH and EI). Also the ability to do telehealth even. It is gratifying.
Scope of abilities when given opportunity 
Field designed to help people 
Advocacy for our clients, the informed SLP, collaboration with other professionals 
Grassroots efforts of SLPs in the field to improve diversity, knowledge and patient centered care
Our knowledge is broad
The variety of populations we serve and the variety of settings in which we can work 
Opportunities for continued learning
Asha does nothing!!!
Ability to move from setting to setting, age to age, virtual to in person without going back to school 
Jobs are plentiful
SLPs are good at self-educating and creating and participating in support communities to help one another.  ASHA is not the source of those positive things though.
Versatility 
A huge potential for specalization (eg. medical vs. school)
the depth of our education needs to shared more widely
Anecdotally, every SLP I’ve met is incredibly kind, hard-working, and genuinely loves and cares for the patients and people they serve. This, to me, is one of the greatest strengths of our profession. 
Our role on a multidisciplinary team; it’s really great to meet with a group of different folks all focused on the development and well being of the same individual but coming at it from a different point of origin. We may be an island sometimes but we’re also never alone in our work.
Ability to work across multiple settings
Other SLPs
The training SLPs receive allow us to work lifespan in all settings. We are not limited to an age group. 
Instant job everywhere in the USA. School based SLP is the only career path in America offering a European style long summer. Ability not to be micromanaged since no one really knows or understands your job. 
Relationships built with kids
The inherent precession itself - that is the ability to help provide a voice (communication)/ swallowing to ppl throughout the lifespan. 
Easy to find a job in my area
Nothing to add
providers had difficulty finding the articles and don't feel comfortable interpreting the results. Additionally many don't have time to read research after a long day of work.
It’s rewarding to work with the families and allows for flexibility when you are raising your own family. 
Our scope is way too broad for a 2 year program and the CF is a shot in the dark as far as landing an actually supportive experience where you grow clinically. There is SO much disparity in opportunities during grad school, CF, and beyond as far as getting experience and quality mentorship in certain settings, especially medical. 
In my experience as a school based SLP, people appreciate and trust our expertise and show a great amount of appreciation for how we impact their children’s lives. 
Universities in my opinion, are providing an improved education to grad students ( more strict standards)
As a group, we constantly want to be and do better. 
I believe we genuinely care about other clinicians and our patients which is why our field is so distraught when we see needs for improvement in graduate programs and ASHA
Flexibility of settings. I love being able to have so many choices!
Love of the job, passion for what we do, ability to help all ages
our skills and expertise are extremely valuable to our clients; the variety of practice settings allows flexibility in work opportunities without having to get another degree
Every slp joins the field to want to help others and make a difference 
Our scope of practice as a major strength
I mean, just the barrier of entry and privilege required to take on loans to enter a relatively low paying field. We have a lot of smart people in this field? Idk 
I hope that we are trying to make the changes that are needed, at least now we are talking about it!!
Stregnths that cam be weaknesses are we are too desirong to pleaee, dedicated more than most other professions, and get taken advantage of in workload amd pay.
Lack of neurodiversity
Provide services to patients that are vital and provide improved quality of care. Our profession is incredibly important for all ages.
Opportunity to work in very different setting (worked in medical SLP outside academia for 20 years, then academia. Could choose a clinical program vs research for this job also.
I feel a strong sense of comaraderie with other SLPs who are like-minded and forward thinking
Tend to attract very competent, caring people.
The flexibility of our field to be able to work full or part time, in many different settings and  different age groups, 
CFY is a strength if used as intended in assisting to grow new grads (in comparison to what I’ve seen for PT/OT)
I feel change is happening. More awareness and acceptance of diagnoses especially now that social media platforms have given these populations a voice. 
Flexibility of sites and hours, can be casual 
Demanding proficiency in MANY subdomains allows us as individuals to advocate for our clients/students and make connections between our work and their functional needs
Salaries mentioned above are strengths only as starting salaries
For me the pay is higher than I anticipated 
As a group, I think SLPs tend to be passionate, well-meaning, and helpful.
Ability to specialize through the career path if desired
We attract people who really do want to help. It’s a shame that our credentialing entities don’t strongly advocate for our fair treatment, protection, and equity and diversity 
A weakness would be ASHA lobbying for increased Medicare reimbursement rates, increasing rates of our untuned codes, advocating for reasonable caseload and productivity standards in healthcare settings, and advocating for reimbursement for Medicaid. 
Ability to be a team member for treatment of many disorders
We are highly educated and experienced, but under appreciated and respected
The flexibility in variety of settings we can work in is a strength
Some excellent people, unique skill set required
No perceived strengths. Flexibility comes with even more of a pay cut. 
I appreciate the support of fellow SLPs. We’re all so burned out, no matter what setting, other SLPs are literally the only ones who understand and offer support.
The flexibility to change paths (school to clinic) 
(Inverse of answer below - it’s a strength to work in a team setting with multiple other SLPs!)
Feeling like I’m helping pt population. Rapport with clients 
can I just list a lot of complaints or 
There are amazing people in our field - providers, researchers, presenters, colleagues, & people like those here trying to make the differences. I am constantly inspired & awed, and I do take a lot of pride in our purpose & mission as a profession to make communication a basic human right for all. 
Professionalism 
We do absolutely critical work!
Many job options and openings all over 
So many areas of needed research are unaddressed.
Job opportunities and openings. Ability to haggle salary due to inability to find other SLPs in rural areas
I really love how you can specialize (nerd out) on a topic of our profession, i just wish there were more opportunities to do this professionally (see the private practice feedback below)
No, not at all. 
Enjoying the actual work
Professionalism, high standards, evidence based practice
Clinical fellowship year
I love the work! Like honestly so great
Caseload vs workload
We are all so passionate about the populations we serve and our field is starting to be kore well recognized
Asha is really good at pissing our field off
Our flexibility and wide scope of practice. 
various work environments, plentiful jobs
     
Flexibility and diversity
No 
We are well credentialed and have a wealth of knowledge. 
Diversity of work environments, populations, intensity (Prn, travel, full time, part time, contract etc)
Broad knowledge 
Collegiality, rigorous training standards 
Variety of work settings and client base and ability to switch within the career 
this movement/survey is promising 
Working with families in a cooperative manner
Access to online continuing education
The diversity of our field and where/what we can do. 
Ability to work in a variety of settings 
strong support system from colleagues
Workloads are not doable
In my experience, SLP attracts motivated, caring and dedicated individuals who want to provide excellent care for patients. 
High level of training and education 
Compassion, empathy, resilience
Compassion and empathy for patients
It’s interesting. It encompasses a broad range of different aspects of communicating across many discipline. Its a helping field, it makes people’s lives better. It’s a stable career, there will always be jobs. (Just not necessarily ones that pay well or have decent respect).  
Professionalism. High standards in most work settings. 
Diversity of employment options/work settings. Current shortage of SLPs makes it easier to find jobs. 
Too much focus on lisps
Opportunity for creativity 
I can always find a job or pick up extra work
not at this time
For the CEUs question, I put moderate strength only because after many years i have researched to find fantastic CEUs but there are a lot out there that are subpar. Also, i feel that our profession has a lot more flexibility compared to upward mobility.
A lot of the reported data on salary seems inaccurate 
There are a lot of us
Diversity of settings
Community support of clinicians and slps working together vs an unsupportive asha
Sharing of ideas throughout the profession; open minded to new strategies/ EBP
Passionate, dedicated, thorough service providers willing to go the extra mile for their clients/patients are a major strength
Ability to specialize and offer your expertise through offering training to other SLPs
Many choices of settings to work in
It's fairly easy to find employment, especially in schools and SNF settings.
State associations are the unsung heroes
Significant weakness in recognition of and consistency of training in dialectical differences
It is nice how we have the option to work in many different settings
Flexibility in part time and full time schedules
this field is not equitable compared to other fields with less education
SLPs as a whole are constantly looking for ways to learn more and improve their treatment and practices in day to day sessions
Our accreditation standards
I have been proud of the research advances that our field has achieved in swallowing and dysphagia over the last few decades.
The fact that ASHA does no direct advocating for school SLPs on caseload/workload issues is a significant weakness
There are a collective of humans in our field (yourselves included!) who are genuinely dedicated to calling out the duplicitousness in our field and making suggestions for solutions to move us forward together.  Significant strength!
The best part of our field is that we tend to be empathetic helpers hello do our best work. However I feel as though this strength of “willingness to help and go the extra mile” is now being used against us to take advantage, pay lower than what we are worth, and work in settings where our expertise is taken for granted leading to burnout. 
I do appreciate how this field allows for the professional to find their niche within the field by allowing for a broad base of settings in which to work and ages with which to treat (however please see my response to a weakness).
Variety of workplaces and locations
Limited educational preparation for the parameters of the job
Advocacy for our our pay. 
Collective ability to help each other when needed 
High expectations for our education and continuing ed
Social impact
Proactive SLPs who provide others with info on ethical and evidence based practice 
What the actual clinicians are doing yo help their patients even at the expense of their peace and mental health.
Flexibility of working options is a significant strength. 
Cover entire lifespan and ability to switch settings 
It is a field that in which you can be a creative problem solver while helping people. It can be very rewarding! But honestly there are other jobs that are all of this with more respect & less stress. 
We have a plethora of settings to work in which improves job satisfaction in my opinion.
I think our profession has great flexibility for work setting and focus
The fact that we are independent practitioners is a significant strength- along with the fact that we can work in a wide variety of settings as well as being self-employed.
I like the job flexibility and variety of settings/populations we can work
When we're able to make a difference in someone's life.
Practice portals were a nice addition for clinicians.
Training in procedures such as MBSS and FEES (Should be a required component of education -competent at graduation)
Compassion, I feel that most younger SLPS have a strong grasp on evidence based practice and holistic patient centered care
Clinical service providers’ (as a whole) dedication to and compassion for the clients we serve
ASHA does nothing to advocate for caseload caps or insurance cuts
Councilor and advocacy for our patients with chronic disorders 
Flexibility in work choices
While one could argue that the wide scope of practice is a weakness, I find it to be a positive because there are so many areas to specialize.  SLPs in general hold themselves accountable to high standards of treatment, which can backfire when given high case/workloads, but when given reasonable working conditions, we do really well.  SLPs typically have good communication styles and in general area approachable and always willing to lend a hand to help the next SLP on the way up.  I wouldn't be where I am without the help of other SLPs, and I am happily working to pay it forward in a similar fashion.
Impact on the quality of lives for others
I like that there is a wide variety of ways to access professional development and connect with other SLPs through social media. I don’t feel like ASHA is responsible for any of that.
The greatest strides in the field have been in the evidence base for our practice, yet this seems to take a very long time to filter into practice. More emphasis on implementation/translational research would help with this.  
The helpful nature of clinicians to aspiring clinicians.  It’s like a mother bird taking a baby under their wing is a significant strength 
There seem to be more SLP graduates than in previous years
Our ability to be sponges to all the surrounding disciplines, literacy and services that help bridge the gap for our patients 
The field has well qualified SLPs with a good work ethic. We have skills in many areas of communication.
SLPs are lifelong learners and continually flex to learn and apply new strategies 
Freedom 
You are able to work in many different settings, autonomy, you are able to help individuals with communication disorders, rewarding field, you are able to switch jobs fairly easily, speech pathologists tend to be very caring and thoughtful. 
Because working conditions at institutions are poor enough that SLPs go into private practice for themselves, we have become very resourceful.
Jon security is great, I don’t know any unemployed SLPs (not by choice) and our work is so meaningful that it keeps me here even when it’s too much 
The SLP communities and groups on social media are amazing! Many groups have encouraged me to learn and unlearn strategies to be the best clinician I can be as practices and interventions evolve.
Low unemployment, high cross-clinical mobility, high rewards such as helping individuals with communication disorders. 
We have many settings which we can work in and multiple settings. 
Better reimbursement rates for services 
Advocating for higher wages has been significant weakness (AKA ASHA is not doing enough)
Work/life balance, abundance of jobs (albeit with strings attached unfortunately)
We have such a range of scope that we don’t even realize it.  For example at the school I work at, I assumed that everyone had this understanding of executive functioning skills and am not just realizing that issues of “processing” are not really understood.  
Inter professional collaboration within our field and amongst other professionals
ability to seek different settings
Fulfillment
The impact we can have on patients' QOL is a big strength. Even though we may not get the spotlight that PT or OT does in the recovery process, being impactful is a big strength. At the end of the day it's about the patient and not me getting a spotlight shone on me. 
Ability to work with variety of clients and settings 
Most SLPs care about helping others
Increase in CEU providers, increase in accessible MedSLP education, SLP Facebook groups for support
Significant strength: it is an interesting field, with opportunities to work in different settings. 
Overall I would say there are very good quality CEU courses and opportunities available. Whether or not these courses are accessible or a reasonable price is up for debate. 
Optional 
As a career changer, the work I do as an SLP-CF feels meaningful (a significant strength over previous career!)
The ability to work in multiple settings 
working with range of other professionals and  taking information from a variety of fields and applying it to patient care.
A sense of community
Flexibility of work schedules and the ability to merge creativity in therapy with EBP are the only significant strengths of our field
Some social media sites have been amazing in their education and support of therapists 
Uniqueness of our field!
The ambition, knowledge, and work ethic of many SLPs in our field. 
Flexibility in work settings and population we are able to work with.
Strong educational and training standards; varied and interesting work settings; good team efforts
Breadth of training 
 Friendships and relationships developed in SLP community; peers will help you with difficult clients/students.
Creativity. Altruism. Advocacy. 
Strength- evolving research, shift towards person centered vs medical model
I feel very fulfilled in my job as a clinical service provider within a healthcare setting. I hope others feel a sense of fulfillment or that they are making a daily difference as well. 
Workload
No consistency in pay across settings, locations, experience
Collaboration within field 
Job availability 
Work in a variety of settings 
Diversity in places we can work with our degree. Allowed for flexibility both personally and professionally.  In general SLPs are great colleagues. smart and passionate about their work.
I like to stay up to date with current strategies and techniques through social media 
Excellent new voices in the field! 
With it being a majority of women, the care and psychological perspective we have is unique and above average
Limited support in relation to Medicare changes
Lisensure
The newness of our field provides us opportunity to effect change in the future, there’s still time to improved the public’s perception of what we do.
I believe that a wide scope of practice is valuable but a weakness in educating new graduates as the scope is so big and the ability to specialize while training would be valuable
We are caring professionals.
Some CEUs are good and current in research however I've seen dated and disputed in information presented in CEUs 
We are badass
Our profession is great at advocating for clients. 
Wide range of settings of employment, versatility of scheduling (PRN, part or full time, hourly/salary)
The diversity of skills and scope 
Public perception in relation to treating the young population 
There are more bilingual programs now than 15 years ago.
Flexibility in job setting/position
SLPs come out of graduate school well versed to work in a multitude of settings, at a starting level. 
I’m thankful there are social media groups pushing SLPs to use EPB. Many SLPs are way too content to continue practicing the way they were taught 20+ years ago. 
Flexibility
A good SLP has amazing abilities to impact the lives of her clients. 
N-a
Nope. Wish i had not gone into significant dept for empty promise of what this profession is.
Mentorships and networking between SLPs 
Patient outcomes, role in prophylactic care
Collaboration with other peofessionals 
Increased presence of education on social media with independent clinicians, academic types providing valid and expert education on swallowing and voice which allow me to be current.
Diversity of settings and skills sets 
The slps I know are hard working, compassionate, and collaborative. 
Variety of settings 
SLP is a rewarding, honorable profession but increased understanding of what we do and what we bring to the interdisciplinary table is essential!!
The ability to work virtually with clients is amazing and be able to work from home! 
The extremely low pay offered by recruiters and exploiting us by forcing contracts instead of W2 employment. 
In my full time role, I work across five settings (outpatient, a school program, inpatient rehab, acute care, and a different monthly clinic). This variety is the ONLY reason I'm happy being a speech language pathologist.  
Movements like this where people are coming together to create change and acknowledge the ways patriarchy and ableism are hurting our field
Committed clinicians; passionate clinicians; incredible clients 
The scope of our practice and knowledge base on how we contribute to the team is a huge strength. We know so much about a wide variety of topics and make huge changes in our patients’ quality of life. 
The flexibility of working in a variety of settings.
The conference is amazing 
Flexibility in types of jobs settings 
Ability to change settings 
Creative problem solving and entrepreneurial spirit
Abilities to co-treat with PT and OT if you know how to maximize on it. All other therapists I have co-treated with are open to understanding how to maximize performance for the patient and they learn more. They learn how to make better referrals. 
Lack of advocacy for school SLPs despite cries for help with work conditions and caseload cap (resulting in large group therapy which results in lack of opportunity for practice and mastery. 
No. Our field is more bad than good at the moment
Having to pay for professional journals is a limitation
Our field is diverse in terms of the type of work available -settings, specialty areas - and in high demand. I always feel secure in my job and it is a strength that our CCCs give legitimacy in any state or area of practice
Knowledgeable 
Knowledge of assistive technology, executive function understanding
SLP knowledge, scope of practice, and ability to provide services to so many in need. 
Our ability to help so many people from birth thu elderly
Science and Research
Slps are considered intelligent 
I love providing therapy and working with my students. However, the stress and workload feels unsustainable for much longer
We are knowledgeable about many things 
ASHA over charges yearly for membership, particularly when compared to the costs OTs and PTs pay for membership to their respective national boards.  
Passion of SLPs to help our patients, students, etc. 
We are able to treat many different disorders but I feel like I don’t have enough time or money to master any one area. 
Mobility in practice areas and types of employers
Not much. I wish I picked a different field.
Status 
No response 
You would think that given the shortage in our field, that would allow for competitive wages
Our role in helping people communicate is important and intellectually interesting.
We know so much more than other professions give us credit for knowing.
Helping people 
Flexibility to work per diem to increase salary 
We help our colleagues and everyone is willing to share their expertise to help ease planning and prep for others. I appreciate the cheap and free CEUs that some provide!
BN/A
The new and upcoming grass roots efforts to improve our field DESPITE ASHA is fantastic. 
Poor accessibility (time, money) to PDs that provide effective therapy approaches 
Our pay needs to reflect the education that we must obtain and maintain otherwise we will never achieve the professional recognition that we have earned
We are excellent at collaborating with peers and building rapport with clients
Flexibility of day to day work
I think clinicians in our field do an excellent job of doing the most we can for our clients with limited resources.
I think the flexibility in work settings is definitely a strength. 
No upward mobility
I believe SLPs have great QOL and personal satisfaction
Variety of job settings and jobs
It's nice that coming out of school we can enter either the school based or healthcare system, and other areas as well, but there is so much education required that only about half can be retained and used. The CF provides an opportunity to get one's footing in the field, but waiting to earn a full license makes landing a healthcare job difficult and CFs often can't work with Medicare, etc patients. 
Respect and appreciation of our clients 
Some SLPs support each other. We want to help others and often put our own wellbeing on hold to serve others. This is also a negative.
Flexibility of graduate clinical work settings and populations as well as potential occupational options 
Tons of jobs in certain areas 
ABA encroachment on our SOP
None at this time.
Helping people
The online support systems that have been created by SLPs working in the field. I’ve learned more from Facebook and Instagram than I have from CEUs.
Options to diversify 
The various work settings SLPs can work in
We are extremely knowledgeable.
Lack of RCTs, application of research in clinical settings, acceptance and advocation for all patients
ASHA repeatedly has been asked to advocate for case load caps and have refused in the event they are used against SLPs. No caps are being used against us. They need to advocate manageable caseloads in order to provide EBP
You 
Updates on dysphagia assessment and evidence based treatment have deemed effectiveness and allows me to feel more competent as a provider of treatment
Ability to practice/find a job
SLPS are resilient, hardworking and determined.  If they are not.... they leave the field or burn out.
.
Weakness - follow through re investigation of reported individuals
Diversity of where we can work (settings) 
I like my job somedays 
 Not at this time
No, still in CFY hard to say
Flexibility of workplace settings if your life circumstances change 
Ni
1. We are expected to be experts in an abundance of topics . 2. Despite this and despite ASHA dues, CEUs through asha are not free . 3. Many SLPs I know in healthcare are feeling effects of burn out . 
The integrity of our scope of practice. 
Recent upticks in social media accounts/groups make it easier to find mentors 
I think most of us care about the people we serve, but we do need to work at making sure our motivation and action help the way people actually want to be helped.
Nothing comes to mind.
job flexibility - have the option to work full time or part time, can take a break to raise family and then get back into the profession without penalization
I’ve been blessed with amazing mentors throughout my career but aware that’s not always the case
I've seen an increase in availability of resources and educational opportunities that didn't exist when I first started out in the field. 
Great independent CEU providers
Speech therapy model of service delivery differs significantly from that of PT and OT, which is often where managers come from in medical outpatient clinic settings. This can lead to unrealistic work and productivity expectations, particularly if you are servicing pediatric clients and adults. 
Hard workers generally speaking 
Availability of job and job security
We are a group of individuals that contonue to strive to make our communities stronger.  
Flexibility of work environments, ability to switch jobs easily, ability to be in charge of caseload in certain settings, autonomy
Ability to work PRN, flexible scheduling and good work/life balance for certain phases of life (new mom) 
Significant strength is that SLPs are in demand.  The ASHA CCCs are accepted in other countries.  That CFY is an important year to grow with mentorship.
Diverse places that SLPs can work
SLPs can have so many different kinds of jobs - a great variety. The need for SLPs is huge right now.
Availability of positions, diverse settings 
Job flexibility and demand
We’ll always have a job! 
Decreased insurance reimbursement, lack of support for lgbtq+
Research in COVID-19 
I want to shout out the growing number of SLPs who are advocating for more client-centered, intersectional care.
Lack of representation and advocacy from ASHA, getting paid less than other rehab professionals (PT/OT), lack of preparation leaving school (especially in dysphagia), pediatric focus in grad programs, lack of diversity in the education programas and fields, lack of programs to support non traditional students 
I finished my graduate degree in 1974. Both my undergraduate and graduate degrees offered the best in preparation, education, clinical.experiences, and support by the professors. See my answer below for my concerns. 
Our field attracts many empathetic, kind, caring people
I love the consistent learning opportunities that my patients provide
Up and coming, more younger and diverse people coming in, 
Strong collegiality of SLPs
Versatility, multi tasking 
The trailblazers that have had the strength and courage to fight and elevate our field, especially with development and implementation of education/training for improving our comptencies in dysphagia management. 
Social media has improved accessibility of new research via podcast, online course offerings and Facebook pages
Educational demands, the clinical fellowship 
Neurodiversity affirming practices 
Growing use of social media platform to discuss issues, new research, etc. 
The majority of SLPs that I personally have been in direct contact with are committed to providing inclusive and appropriate services to patients.
I think that there can be a lot of animosity between SLPs but I also think that there are many therapists out there who try to support newer clinicians and each other. I generally find that most SLPs are very motivated to learn and search for information they are missing, however I think we do them a disservice spending all that time and money and school and STILL graduating lack so much knowledge. 
Extremely high caseloads in the state of Indiana
Ceus
Weakness in regards to healthcare 
Research is become more accessible. 
Strengths include having flexibility to pursue different avenues of interest across the profession. In addition to this I do feel that a bulk of my education was beneficial in preparing me for work as an SLP.
Graduate degree can be used in a variety of settings, so I never feel stuck for too long. 
Independently created CEU coursework that augments areas of learning that were lacking within a graduate curriculum
Love the wide scope of practice, flexibility of job/setting options within the field, and pride in being a "SPEECHIE"
moderate Strength is options for flexible work days (can work prn, part time, remotely, days, evenings, etc)
Weaknesses: demanding work load (physical work load and documentation) and the pay is low. I am a CF still working paycheck to paycheck to make ends meet even with a masters degree, 
It is a perfect mix of human services and the medical field.
I think this field has done a good job attracting SLPs that want to help others and care about people. 
Graduation preparation for medical positions was severely lacking. I felt like I knew nothing about voice, dysphagia, and cognitive treatment. And my CFY experience was an unregulated nightmare that ASHA was no help in supporting and advocating for me with.
I believe that graduate school course lack so much information. I think we need to be able to specialize within areas in grad school to help tailor or skills. I also feel that if you want to be an expert in the entire field maybe a clinical doctorate option would be better. On the job training is very hard with so many demands and productivity standard. 
collaboration among colleagues
Attracts passionate individuals who want to help others. Attracts hard workers. 
Though we aren’t paid enough, we are paid more than other direct service professionals (eg: social workers, bachelor level behavior therapists) though they should be paid more as well. 
I think being a female dominated profession is a huge strength because lady brains are badass
Friendships. Opportunity to work in multiple settings. Availability of jobs. 
Helping people with the essential things of human life. Very rewarding.
Asha is a weakness, adequate medical training is a weakness
SLP jobs are needed and there is a good market for available jobs
Specialize in our area (although too vast); 
Easy to get a job once you have your cccs, choose from various settings
We have wide and far reaching knowledge 
SLPs collaborate after graduating college 
Being a consulted service (maintaining some autonomy on how we address consults), ability to collaborate with other professions, ownership of FEES/MBS and H&N cancer (TEP changes etc)
The lack of information about socio-economic status of SLPs is of monumental concern to me.
High level of job satification when you can help patients and families 
Working with clients is fulfilling 
Employability is high. It is possible to switch settings or areas of professional focus. It is possible to be part time and then return to full time. It can be very rewarding to work with clients. 
I think we are overworked as many of us are held to high productivity standards and/or work for companies who take advantage of us. We are left with little to no support from ASHA. On top of it, we are paid less than our OT and PT colleagues in many settings. We are taken advantage of and have no way of fighting back. 
There is heightened awareness of the impact of cognition communication as more and more high profiled individuals are experiencing these deficits. 
Perception of the public as a respected professional and expert in our field. 
Impact on certain populations like head and neck cancer or als patients. 
Creativity of SLPs to provide services to people with a wide range of disabilities
Our adaptability.
Job stability
I think the collaborative aspect of our field is a significant strength. 
The current job market and ability to work in so many settings with such varied populations is a big strength in our field. 
The strength of SLP I have worked with is their ability to engage in interprofessional collaboration
SLPs do an excellent job of being generalists.  Regardless of the setting, they are able to manage high and diverse caseloads.
ASHA doesn't advocate for smaller caseloads or higher salary for school SLPs. 
job security is a strength of our field
Consideration to those who create caseload sizes for school setting. 
Our desire to help others and advocate for our patients 
The ability to be employed anywhere, the ability to be self-employed, the ability to change settings with relative ease, the ability to work with people across the lifespan
The commitment of SLP's to giving the best of care to those served. It goes above and beyond what often seems to be possible. Whilethe demands grow, the SLP has consistently shown the ability to adapt, often to the detriment of the well being of the SLP.
The variety of settings and populations
Not at this time.
We have such a wide umbrella and, especially in educational setttings, we are called on to do everything (speaking, listening, artic, fluency, voice, swallowing, reading, writing, pre-literacy, cognitive communication, TBI, etc).  We really need to promote this among schools, parents, employers, and communities alike.
sharing of knowledge and the camaraderie of our field
the broad range of employment opportunities; the depth and breadth of the field; the variety of skills/knowledge 
easily able to find flexible employment
A perceived strength would be that there are many job openings. An SLP can always find a job.
The majority of SLPs I have met are well-intentioned, talented clinicians who are willing to help younger clinicians enter the field.
Variety of work settings
I think that SLPs are excellent at patient advocacy. 
Greatest career for opportunities in varied areas.  Need a change?  No worries!
The field of speech-language pathology is evolving and that is a good thing
The strength of this field is helping children be able to communicate. 
Scope, setting, and flexibility are strengths
It is a strength to have such a wide-open field of employment, in that SLPs can change their scope or area of expertise relatively easily. 
After 17 years ….I’m struggling to find one…I have worked medical and education…quit taking 4.0 students in the graduate programs! Many who can’t effectively communicate to adults or peers. That’s why we are leaving at an alarming rate! Get people who can effectively communicate and not just read a book and take a test. 
SLP-A are a great addition to the field, however, not all states recognize this label
advocacy at the state and federal levels
I am best able to access research from the Informed SLP, rather than ASHA Leader and other ASHA sponsored programs
The questions are confusing because just b/c the US News says something is true doesn't mean it's true... So like is it a "moderate strength" if it's a lie? There should be a place to say "I don't think this is true."
Employment opportunities- there are not enough SLPs so I feel like I have job options at least; I liked the aspect of having opportunities and helping people when I first started into this field.
I a am proud to be a life time member of ASHA!  I have seen our professions evolve over the past 40+ years through research, education and advocacy to help those with communication disorders. I am amazed and dismayed at the same time at the younger generation of SLPs in terms of work ethic, general ability coming out of grad school and their own expectations of what our field is and what is should be. 
It’s a field with a broad range of job opportunities 
The ability to work in many environments is a significant strength
school-aged issues issues are addressed on a regular basis through articles and training
I appreciate the flexibility of having multiple work settings (schools, home health, hospital, private practice) available to me
SLPs have a broad range of knowledge on many aspects of health and education
Universities prepare students very well.  The students I've worked with, from many different universities, have been excellent.
They’re great at collecting our dues.
My SLP colleagues are some of the HARDEST working people that I know!!!  We care deeply for our clients/students/patients. The amount of professional development that SLPs do is a strength of this profession.
The field is evolving in exciting ways that I have not previously seen in my career, ways focusing on positive changes related to diversity, professional inequity, addressing systematic professional and patient barriers, etc.
We are flexible, hard working, persistent, intelligent. and highly independent professionals
NA- I’m frustrated. 
1. The opportunity for direct patient care and form relationships with patients and their families on a day to day basis which results in a regular feeling of "I am making a difference/my job makes a difference in the lives of others" - which in turn is what keeps me in the field! 2. The opportunity to work in a variety of settings with a variety of populations and the ability to move between different populations and settings as your career or lifestyle needs grow/evolve. The ability to potentially continue working per diem or part time in a setting while either raising a family or exploring other career options.
felxibility of setting and low unemployment 
ability to work in a variety of settings
Flexibility and broad scope of practice, ability to pivot between clientele and setting switch a variety of needs
Not at this time 
I feel like the amount of PD and options in requiring are a strength allowing us to obtain necessary hours, but not in excess.  SLP in SOME school districts are required to keep a teacher's license with NO EDUCATION HOURS required for SLP degree.  This information should be passed down from ASHA and govern ALL states and not be left up to each individual district.  
The ability to specialize in certain areas
Ease of finding employment.
I wanted to say the CEU question is really varied - there are some truly excellent CEUs and some truly terrible ones, and ASHA isn’t doing a lot to provide that (besides charging too much for the learning pass and convention).; what we are doing matters, but I don’t know how to put that into a succinct strength - but giving access to communication is a strength, there are just so many faults within our field 
Our true love/passion of this very involved field which allows us to deal with the added stress/anxiety/endless work we deal with. The ability to share information/research/tips with others is who understand this field is very helpful.      
Fun, stimulating
Grad school does not prepare you at all for clinical cases
Strengths include the flexibility to be a SLP and work with different populations. 
Social media presence/learning through SLP “guru’s” in instagram 
The rigorous graduate program
Continuing education
Strength is flexibility 
Flexibility and opportunity to change settings 
Depending on setting, interdisciplinary work with other professions is a strength
Ability to work in different environments and the ability to specialize. 
varied work settings and clients
I think flexibility should have been separated from "upward mobility and flexibility".  We do have flexibility but I do not think we have upward mobility.
Good job security, growth opportunities. 
Being able to work in different settings 
Compassionate, patient focused 
Our knowledge and understanding of complex swallow physiology 
The mentorship fellow SLPs are willing to offer to better the profession.
Flexibilty and autonomy
Increased grassroots efforts and organizing via social media 
The ability to cover such a broad number of disorders and switch focuses.
Flexibility and autonomy are huge. The diversity of disorders and interventions we work with makes it always interesting!
Our knowledge and expertise is tremendous and sadly not valued by the majority that we work with regardless of our work setting. 
Lower caseloads!!!! 60-70 kids is completely unethical and unreasonable. How are students supposed to make progress? Cap caseloads at 35-40
In my experience, SLPs, as a whole, generally have a reputation for being professional, hard-working, and ethical. 
Support from fellow SLPs
I feel that the breadth of services we offer is both a strength and a weakness. I love that we have so many ways to serve but it stretches us all too thin. I also think that the ideal ASHA states to the public is great, but the reality of their advocacy is significantly muted. 
Lol 
wide scope of practice/knowledge
SLPs are amazing at collaboration and working in teams. We love gaining knowledge in how research can be applied in the real world. We care deeply about helping others and work hard to put out students/clients/patients first. 
 Job security
Caring nature of SLPs, more likely to work overtime etc 
None that I can think of - if I could tell my younger self, I would switch to another therapy (like Physical therapy) with greater respect, pay and less stress.
We are all very good at teaching each other and networking. 
Flexibility and ability to change populations or treatment areas 
Variability and ability to change settings and focus areas allows for change when burnout occurs in one area
community through social media, student intern creation of data collection to broaden knowledge regarding pay gaps
The SLP’s who still practice seem to always work together to share information/feedback which is beneficial for our vast field. 
knowledge and skills to work with wide range of ages, disabilities/conditions, and settings involved in field
Number of employment opportunities, job mobility
The variety of setting, and how we can actually help people
Easy to find a job
What we actually do in our jobs is our greatest strength and is a life-altering gift to those who benefit from it. 
The connections we make with fellow SLPs. 
Meaningful and fascinating work 
The potential to really help improve the quality of life for people 
Lots of different settings/career paths initially if desired. Attracts generally smart motivated people to field 
Flexibility in varied work settings
Many strong, intelligent, hard working professionals who care deeply about their work. 
Employability
Flexibility to work / transfer skills in multiple settings 
Despite the weaknesses, overall the people in our field are compassionate and want to do what’s best for their clients/patients 
Opportunities for jobs
Amazing colleagues 
We try to take of and helpmeach other out...like wounded soliders carrying each other on the battlefield.
ASHA does not fight for the rights and better opportunities for their members
-
Variability of settings available to work 
We’ll always been in need
Flexibility to change within your field - hospitals to schools/children to adults/ full time to part time etc; flexibility to own your own practice or materials company
Different areas of specialization if you are lucky enough to get into the area you want specialize in
We have varied abilities to support a variety of people throughout the lifespan.
The compassion and selflessness of those who practice 
Flexibility within field (ie: changing settings) 
Number of settings to work in
We persevere with significant responsibilities to our patients/clients and limited salaries, research and respect 
Strengths: flexibility, opportunities to do meaningful work/supporting families and children
SLPs provide incredible services to those in need. 
Comradery among colleagues 
Our field is versatile and interesting, and we make a measurable difference in people’s lives
The job is noble and fullfilling.
Had I known all of the  points made on this survey prior to choosing to become an SLP (truly known) I probably wouldn’t have done it. The moral distress and resulting fight and effort I feel daily due to these issues is exhausting, lonely, frustrating and demoralizing. 
SLPs are a passionate and caring breed. We are taken advantage of. 
We have more clinical autonomy than some other therapy professions
No.  I'm barely hanging on.
One of the strengths of our field is the general sense that we as professionals want to help people communicate and swallow effectively; however, that goal falls flat when we have a huge shortage of SLP/AUDs with PHDs so our practice is slow to change and we are losing the science. 
Flexibility in job setting, ease or moving between jobs and positions
I perceive a strength: the strengths of SLPs connecting online through social media, podcasts, blogs, and forums. I feel that med SLPs on social media recognize the insufficient training we received in grad school. We recognize the disconnect from research and academics from clinical practice, and the issues with accessibility and practical application of that information. Education sources I've learned from include blogs, instagrams, pintrests, facebook forums, resources online -- and that’s without enrolling in memberships or training like medSLPcollective or other groups. Social media also sheds light on the weakness of ASHA and weaknesses across the field (see weakness answer below). I feel like the social media aspect helps me keep my finger on the pulse of current issues within our field that we need to come together to address (e.g. clinical, EBP, social, political, professional); keeps me informed and more up to date than other education sources on all of those topics; and spurs me to critically self-reflect on my own clinical and professional strengths and weakness.
our work is powerful and meaningful and I have so much pride for our whole field for this!
Clinical outcomes, dedication to client care
Diversity of workplaces, clientele
clinical education
There’s a strong collegiate atmosphere amongst SLPs that I always appreciate especially in times we get together during conferences 
Documentation expectations compared to caseload expectations are insane 
I find that advocacy within individuals and smaller groups (not ASHA…) truly believe in advocacy and how to make the field more ethical, safe, and supportive of clients and professionals. 
Commitment to clients and dedication to going above and beyond in our jobs
I think the adaptability and the broad range of scope has allowed me to be fluid with my interests without restricting me to one specific area of practice. I get bored quickly and I like the variety within the jobs I choose
I love what we do. I guess that’s where it ends. I am proud of our skills and how we can help people but that doesn’t pay the bills.
Opportunities to collaborate with other professionals, eg. OT, PT, teachers
The name "pathology" is a significant weakness for the phonology/artic (non-motor SSD) and voice (non-medical) side of this profession
The individuals who daily commit themselves to doing what is right by children, regardless of how challenging their settings might be
The biggest strength about this field is the ability to treat across the lifespan in many different settings. 
Emotional connections to those we serve is highly under appreciated 
High level of motivation to make positive change in the lives of those we work with, passion about under-recognized areas of need/disability in our communities 
Versatility and growing need 
There are leaders in the field with passion that do motivate others
n
ASHA is useless and a waste of money
Ever-evolving ways to help others 
Two years into this profession it feels like we’re a best kept secret. We’re great at being generalists and lifelong learning. 
Flexibility, Growth
Some perceived strengths I can think of is that our field does bring great outcomes to our patients at times  
promotion of patient centered practices 
N.A. 
Variety of  settings
I love how versatile this field is, working with all ages, multiple settings…what a gift!
Strength-online resources have greatly diversified what’s available, Weakness-but exist only because ASHA failed to do so
Adherence to a high standard of knowledge & expertise in our field.
the strive to do better!
Flexibility in settings 
Collaboration with other therapy disciplines. 
Job security - we’re always needed 
We have a wide variety of employment options (schools, hospitals, SNF, private clinics) and can specialize in one area, or be more of a generalist
Always can find a job
Care clients and the joy that comes from seeing progress
The value we add in acute care and inpatient rehabilitation for swallowing, trach/vent with swallowing and voice. Aphasia therapy is a strenght and value added to our field.
I think the ability to have options across multiple settings in your career is a huge strength. I couldn’t get into a hospital at graduation, but I worked hard and made my way through different settings all helping me get my foot in the door and eventually to my dream job of an acute care SLP in a odes hospital. 
I happen to work in a hospital that values ST. We have a clinical ladder system based on years of experience in addition to being able to gain points for things such as:running stroke support group, doing research, providing i services, doing extra continuing education. It allows for a greater upward mobility of salary. And at this point in my career I feel I am fairly compensated.
US SLPs are able to provide support in the school system. In other countries this doesn’t happen.
I do not
In healthcare, we spend more time talking with and getting to know patients than a lot of other medical providers (not their fault, nurses and MDs deal with other significant stressors and time issues), so this makes us great patient advocates.
Flexibility of work, being able to be a business owner and switch to a different style of career (adult vs kids). A lot of flexibility on what kind of job you can have. 
Strength: SLPs helping themselves by starting businesses like TISLP and SLP TOOLKIT and offering CEU opportunities to ensure EBP is attainable. (with no thanks to ASHA)
Strengths related to working in HC and Higher ed are relative flexibility. 
I believe that the willingness of most SLP professionals to tolerate below reasonable wages, poor work-life balance, excessive stress and work load is evidence of both a strength and weakness. So many of us are willing to go above and beyond for our patients at the expense of our own well being. 
Facilitating change for clients for the better 
Choice of possible work settings 
The power SLPs sharing their knowledge on of social media and the collegiality of SLPs on Instagram who came together to protect Dr. Humbert from an absurd attack. Shame on ASHA for allowing that circus. Apps and services like The Informed SLP, Tactus, Honeycomb, FAST from neuroSLP, dysphagia cafe, etc. even the meme pages (inpatient rehab memes, dysphagia dude, etc) are so valuable to me as a new member of the profession. 
Our frequent and often personal interaction with families. 
SLP’s make do with so little, our ability to fight is the strength. We are badasses. But we are tired and we are burning the stick at both ends. And our clients are incredible. 
Variable as a field as a whole,  but my training to question physicians and work intimately with them has been very helpful.  I've had Neurologists ask my opinion on cases and also they've trusted me with treating loved ones' dysphagia. 
Job flexibility-ability to go part time or find part time work in a variety of settings 
I feel like the female dominant nature of our profession could be a strength if we all recognize how powerful we can be, but it has contributed to the overall decreased pay and credibility of our profession as well due to societal standards.
Job Opportunities 
Flexibility to practice in different settings 
Flexible hours, able to work part-time: both mom friendly
Flexibility in settings
No. 
Recent push for change and advocacy in the field for more diversity and compensation 
variety of settings/areas of specialities to work in
SLPs have a strong desire to learn and improve
Felixibility within our field
Continued research to support evidence based practice 
Difficult to change jobs and increase or maintain salary, lack of support in schools, school environment poor for clinical decisions, a lot of jobs don’t offer good benefits (retirement or healthcare) 
Weakness in the area of education pertaining to healthcare side of field. Not enough emphasis on things like dysphagia etc
Flexible.  Potential of change within the profession. 
Flexibility in career options
ASHA does not help my career and with big topics like random SLPs creating their own certifications, they're silent. 
There is a lot of flexibility in options for settings
The ability for the field to break into specialized areas (eg. education vs medical). These targeted areas can be significant for curriculum in education vs dietary requirements in hospitals if we could utilize these areas for the SLP for increased training to specialized including degrees that go beyond the masters (eg 36 additional credits for curriculum specialities with vocabulary reading from and SLP standpoint vs. something similar to nurse practitioner for diet/swallowing in medical field)
It has been easy for me to find prn work and part time work (in adult setting) which has allowed me flexibility and better schedule for being a working mother 
ability to work in many different settings
Not really
None. It’s not a great field.
Flexibility/options in work schedule. Easy to switch around FT/PT/PRN
We can work in a variety of settings with a variety of populations
Access to employment opportunities 
No, honestly 
ASHA annual wage report is not accurate representation of those working in our field and lacks enough information to make an informed decision to enter the field. 
I do not feel many SLPs are adequately compensated. For example, I earn 60k/year as a full-time early intervention SLP.
poor pay high debt and stress
Nope
Because SLPs work across the US in the educational setting, we can positively impact children who otherwise would not have access to our services 
The ability to change from education to medical with relative ease. No other profession has so many jobs in both k-12 and medical
The opportunity to collaborate with other professionals in similar fields. 
No. I am very dissatisfied with this career.
We are Caring people 
Broad scope so can specialise in quite a choice of areas.
Collaboration with other professionals (OT/PT/ENT)
ASHA Journals are good, but they should be available to all SLPs regardless of ASHA membership. 
Variety of settings; ability to open own practice 
Working with other therapeutic specialists. When families or teams listen to feedback, usually growth in language skills are seen. It’s amazing seeing a patient gain skills they have never had before. 
The majority of those in our field chose this profession because we want to help.  This means we are a compassionate and empathetic group who desire to provide best services for our pts. 
The variety of settings we can work in
Lots of opportunity, not obsolete, great supporting career
Research is always evolving
The diversity in our scope of practice within healthcare—-it is also a “threat” in a SWOT analysis.   
Increasing attention on implementation science
Variability to settings 
Creativity, more opportunities to work 1:1 with our patients and clients.
It seems that hospitals do seem to have more awareness of our presence; however, the quality expected and scope seems reduced from what it should be
Many settings (e.g. clinic, hospital, school, rehab, online, professor)
Helping profession. 
Numerous employment opportunities in terms of the setting and population
Inadequate salaries 
Variety of professional environments and increase in virtual service modalities
Creativity and compassion of SLPs as a group 
field often attracts clinicians who are caring, empathetic people
Not at this time. 
Employment setting options, specialty areas
Nope, it sucks 
Great flexibility if you have family income that allows part time work
We are a compassionate, collaborative profession
Different setting to provide our services
The recent shift to prioritize connection over compliance, especially compared to other fields that work with disabled people. The autonomy and independence at some jobs
Variety of settings SLPs can work in
I have been impressed and appreciative that many apraxia researchers have published their treatment techniques and methodologies for free online. Same with Lidcombe. Thank you to those researchers!!
I’m too burnt out to think of strengths other than the students I get to work with every day.
Personally, overall stress level and job flexibility(variety of settings, FT/PT/PRN opportunities)
I think it should be discussed that some hispanics identity as white and some as mix race which can definitely put a huge dent in demographics 
The accredation process for graduate programs and CCC's are well done.
Ease of finding work
We have a diverse population to serve 
Regarding my answer to where I work- you left off early intervention. 
I think the scope of practice is the perfect size, enjoy the variety of topics 
Diversity of employment opportunities
Multiple areas for deep specialization; fulfillment & purpose, especially with client-facing time
Expertise in numerous areas. 
Easy to find at least a job, even if not preferred setting
We have some truly exceptional clinicians 
Depth of our knowledge
Unity, compassion, women led 
More training in specialty areas
Expanding scope of practice 
Many options 
Flexibility in settings and specialty areas
Nothing really
I like the broad score. Doesn't get boring
This job sucks
the need of SLPs, job security (in education settings at least)
Lots of willing and excellent mentors
I hate paying so much money to asha every year and then not being able to access articles!
Most who choose this field are passionate and go into the field to help others
Compassion and care for clients at the clinical level.
The SLP allows a unique opportunity to really help individuals improve health, safety and QOL. My personal experience- I have been fortunate to work with terrific colleagues who support each other and advocate for our profession and our clients. Opportunities for lifelong learning as research continues to grow our EBP. 
Lack of employee advocacy groups i.e. unions, lack of opportunities for pay raises 
I receive more support from my employer, department, and interdisciplinary colleagues than I do from ASHA
N/A. All areas of our field need improvement. 
Research on previous practices and development of improvements that need to be made. 
Unique clinical skill set 
Our ability to work in various settings and with many different populations should be celebrated. 
I have learned more through continuing education and fb groups. That’s to say mentorship makes a difference when cfy is sub par. 
The field is amazing and helps patients nationwide gain or regain function in various aspects such as communication, voice, and swallowing.
job stability 
Flexibility in work setting 
Flexibility of settings (children vs adults, inpatient vs outpatient services)
Speech therapist are not on a therapist scale in schools like our very similar counterparts PT and OT. We should be compensated the same if not more based on the work/weight SLPs have in schools 
The field has a large percentage of individuals who are resilient, collaborative, cooperative, and striving for excellence. Based on the people I work with and have worked with or encountered, I chose quite possibly one of the best fields in the workforce.
Ability to problem solve, to get creative, to thrive despite adversity
Most willing to adapt to new research to provide best evidenced based practice.
Flexibility for work
In some settings like home health if we are willing to speak out you have a great opportunity to make speech language pathologist and their scope better known.
A good clinical fellowship is a plus when supervision is well done, opportunities for continuing education
most SLPs I know are personally very lit up about the work they are doing and sharing our profession with other medical professions. 
Online community 
The variability of career paths 
A field full of passionate and hard working clinicians 
I think that the opportunity to collaborate with other professionals and gain access to ideas and expertise in continuing education opportunities and is a benefit, but the cost barrier to access these opportunities can often be a significant challenge for some SLPs who do not have this as a benefit of employment, for example.
Growing field with lots of job opportunities
No, our field is incredibly underrepresented, underpaid, undervalued, under-respected, and struggling
Qualified, dedicated professionals 
Variety of job opportunities
I’ve had several mentors who have given me wisdom and experiences that school never did. I’ve been very lucky to have a network of strong male and female SLPs to look up to. 
My graduate school experience was a relative strength
Opportunities to do placements abroad, good relationships with other disciplines (e.g. OT/PT/RD), knowledge of both adult and pediatric issues
Flexibility of moving settings
Most SLPs will do what they need to do to work at the top of their license and try to be everything for everyone. That is why it has become so stressful.
The job can be rewarding
The desire to improve as a profession in terms of pay/research/ASHA etc. We are AWARE there are issues. 
We are severely underpayed, the avg mentioned above is no where near correct.
Cultural differences give bigger scope for better research. 
I think that an SLP's ability to collaborate with other providers is very good, but I am afraid that egos get in the way as well as personal agendas for SM popularity.  
Availability of jobs— but I guess that might not be a strength if that means there are so many positions needed but are not filled
The strength is that we are well educated, licensed professionals that hold the CCC-SLP credentials. 
Patient/client/student advocacy 
'- job security 
Highly respected career in some settings.
(Just adding that I’m a PhD student, which wasn’t an option so I chose the college researcher option -  feel free to change my demographic answer as needed). 
I think that one of our biggest strengths is the types of people that become SLPs. Everyone I've worked with (both my grad school peers and people in the profession for longer) is always so kind and collaborative and willing to work with others.
Flexibility of settings 
Collegiality, good research going on, flexible schedules 
Our client rapport skills
SLPs are generally very passionate and willing to adapt to change and resilient 
The reported salaries are not accurate in practice they are much lower 
Opportunities to treat a wide swath of disorders, relative autonomy in the workplace
Flexibility in schedule, mobility across different settings in the field of SLP
The flexibility to work in hospital or school settings, in person or remotely, with a variety of clients or at an administrative level.
I think people who go into the MedSLP field often fall into by accident but develop a passion for the field and patients. It’s rare to find a therapist in the med world who started out as apathetic to patients and their struggles. Altruism abounds in our field. We are good people. 
The ability to change settings
Increase in awareness of appropriate assessment and treatment for ppl from diverse backgrounds 
Strength: our field has created connection through social media where we can share stories and help advocate for ourselves, we help such a wide variety of people and make such an impact on others, research has really improved as far as therapy techniques and strategies for our clients
In general, SLPs tend to be good coworkers and teammates (depending on setting)
I cannot stress enough the ability of flexibility in our field!
We are not paid well for our area of expertise. As a consequence I am looking for a 2nd career
The amazing amount of TPT resources SLPs have created for each other. 
Ability to work in different settings.
Caseload number is a significant weakness 
ASHA is not advocating for increases in reimbursements with insurances for speech therapy.
New graduate SLP’s continue to exhibit enthusiasm and desire to learn more so they can help their patients!  
Compassion for the clients
high demand for SLPs/more opportunities 
The opportunity to join our voices together for collective bargaining. And guaranteed jobs in pretty much every city, even if it’s not an ideal setting. 
The ability to have variety and essential change careers while also being an SLP (I am going from schools to peds home health)
We have the ability to work in multiple settings 
We are problem solvers. We are solution finders. 
I do not know any school SLPs even close to $69,000 a year and even that number with a full-time masters program is embarrassing. Our hours are crazy and not having a caseload cap is detrimental to students. 
I believe SLPs are at large a compassionate, dedicated, kind group of professionals 
High demand 
I applaud those who follow research and continue to learn and change their practice to reflect current evidence. 
Support from ASHA (lack thereof), understanding of related professionals in re: SLPs roles, PAY!!!!, scalability
Scope of practice is too broad and ASHA gives SLPs little support.
As an SLP you will almost certainly find a job.
Flexibility and personal growth
Pay with consideration to surrounding area (dependent on state)
Movement towards a lens of neurodiversity rather than pathologizing 
The field is expanding in what was once thought possible to treat 
I feel like having the flexibility to work in a variety of settings no matter where you live is a real strength for our profession.
Flexibility, problem solving abilities, productivity
Caseloads in the schools
flexibility with jobs, job stability in my location, ability to work with different populations
Having one clearly defined governing organization is a strength and a weakness
Flexibility in job types (part time, full time, per diem)
EBP is increasing in the last decade.  Technology has made research more accessible.  Podcasts and listservs are important.
Ability to collaborate with other disciplines.  Functional focus on communication. 
In my experience, SLPs want to help their patients/clients/students (whether they are actually helping is a different answer)
The flexibility of Locations we can work and populations
Our field does a really good job of collaborating with other team members (significant strength)
Variety of settings, telepractice innovation, and ability to pivot.
Flexibility, collaboration, impacting real change 
Ongoing acceptance and training with technology 
Good work ethic and caring professionals 
It’s a community that supports one another and is always willing to help, problem solve, and give advice!
I think that the field consists of bright people that are almost always appreciated by our clients and those who understand that significant life improvements we can offer.
The caseloads are way too high, adding to stress and burnout
Flexibility in settings and work hours 
The strengths are the amazing people that are in this profession. 
Long term relationships with clients and families, allowing us to potentially follow them and help long term.
I am excited that social media has provided a new outlet for learning and understanding experiences of other SLPs
SLPs as a whole make a huge impact on the betterment of society 
There are plenty of jobs this field and variety of jobs. 
Our field is growing. 
Focus on evidenced based practice! 
Ability to make a significant difference in people’s lives
I am thankful for the amount of options that this field gives me.
We cover a lot of topics
Flexibility to choose your occupational venue, i.e., Hospital, SNF, School , private practice, clinical work etc,
We have a TON of really talented and knowledge SLPs but so many are burnt out within the first ten years of their career. SLPs have also been fantastic at sharing amongst ourselves and on social media to supper each other in the ways that ASHA is not. 
SLPs are the best!
The connections made with families and clients create a sense of fufillment
Varied settings we can work in
The ability to work part time is more accessible than in many other fields. 
People say being female dominated is a weakness and yes men provide an insight women don’t have but let’s be honest… most of the companies we hate and that are greedy are run by men. Women tend to be more compassionate. So is it really a bad thing that a field reliant on patient care is dominated by women? We just need to learn to be stronger but I don’t think the field will ever be 50/50. 
The ability to transition between settings.
Isolation for most of us. Only slp in our facilities. 
The flexibility to move among health and education settings is a benefit ONLY if the provider is knowledgeable in current EBP for all settings in which they are providing services 
Camaraderie
Flexibility with practice/settings
Interdisciplinary collaboration 
Hello, just wanted to address the first question. I let my CCC's go this year after paying ASHA for them for 35 years. I did not see a box to click for MA, SLP. I work in a school district where CCC's are not required.  
The movement to make therapy as functional as possible
we tend to love this field and our clients
always a job available
ASHA's Mutual Recognition Agreement.  We can travel outside our country and take our credentials with us.  
To the extent that SLPs are broadly trained the opportunity to work in different aspects of the field is a strength.
There is mobility across settings (e.g., health, education, private) that few other professions afford. Our graduate programs tend to attract very bright students.
Multiple opportunities to work in a variety of settings (lots of job opportunities) 
The importance of our services for students' literacy and academic achievement.
What we do is a significant strength of our profession and grossly under-acknowledged
It is very broad; there are a variety of career opportunities with this field
Opportunities for interprofessional practice
unique relationships with young children and families that positions EI SLPs as supporters of early development and an advocate for caregivers and their mental health. SLPs are also qualified and have established relationships with families of young children to screen for perinatal menatal health concerns like postpartum depression and anxiety.
The willingness to share knowledge and take personal time to support colleagues outside of our place of business. 
Hard to encapsulate this but soon we as a profession are going to have to come to terms with how difficult it is to be a generalist
We do great work and are compassionate professionals. 
The variability of worksites, and age ranges along with the ability to change among them throughout our career .
Neurodiversity and social model is creeping into our field to eclipse the medical model in some settings
Availability of jobs is a significant strength; varied opportunities; gratifying profession with considerable fulfillment
Ability to change careers within the same field
SLPs are generally helpful and supportive in my experience when they have the opportunity to work together.
The work we do is meaningful, especially when working on functional communication skills. We have value.
Flexibility of hours
SLPs are the first in educational settings to take on the brunt of the work and have full plates compared to those around them (sped, sps, ot, pt)
Work cohorts who are dedicated to EBP
You can always find a job (even if you’re underpaid or overworked)!
Emphasis on collaboration with other professions 
Large and varied knowledge base, flexible work environment in some settings, 
Lack of funding opportunities to help our clients, e.g., funding for AAC devices 
None to add
The flexibility of working in different settings and job availability 
Flexibility in professional setting options, flexibility to pursue areas of interest within the field, emphasis on continual professional growth
I believe the underlying mission of the field is a strength - to help people communicate more effectively and/or treat issues related to feeding and swallowing
Our significant empathy and effort we put into our patients
the passion of almost everyone in the field, for the profession and for helping their patients: significant strength
lots of people who want to help others, increased neurodiversity awareness, increased person-centered care across the field
We tend to be the best communicators in whatever setting we are in, ensuring better services and outcomes for our patients/clients/kids. 
Care SLPs have for our clients & doing what it takes to improve their skills 
Our ability to handle high stress and advocacy work 
Retention of therapists in schools 
Slps willingness to help each other as well as others
There are a large array of settings and communication difficulties to work with. 
The way that ASHA assisted states to provide resources for teletherapy during COVID
Perseverance 
Flexibility of Scheduling.
Only strength in my opinion is the different settings SLPs can work in
Incredible flexibility and adaptability 
Versatile settings
I am able to help someone every single day. 
We are so well educated but I do not feel we are always able to demonstrate these skills. We are not understood as a field and undervalued 
Ample job opportunities 
We are in demand i guess 
COMMUNITY AMONGST OURSELVES (IN MY EXPERIENCE)
Small community, ability to work work all ages
Ability to work in various settings with a wide range of ages
Collaboration amongst SLPs within a school district 
I like the flexibility of being able to work in a variety of settings as an SLP.
I perceive it a moderate to significant weakness that I pay huge ASHA dues but not sure of how this directly benefit me as a clinician. 
The ability to help others communicate effectively so they can be heard is truly a rewarding and moving experience.
Diversity of the field; strong academic creditials of SLPs 
The ability to be able to treat and support a variety of disorders 
variation of settings, part-time v. full-time, etc.
Ability to guide academic programming related to language 
An opportunity to serve others
Making a difference, helping peopls
strength: Diversity of employment setting and breadth/scope of the "9 topics" 
I've been in this career for over 20 years and there are a number of great things about it.
flexibility, values based, meaningful, previously more congeniality amonng members, previously more effort to learn from others rather than expecting to find all therapy options in a EBP study
Important IEP Team Member offering expertise in specialized area
Simply, we help people and that ultimately is what allows for some measure of satisfaction.
Ability/Flexibility to support across the lifespan in various settings, CFY mentorship
Variety of work options (different settings, wide scope of practice, all ages, etc)
SLPs determination to strive for better skills.
Every client, student, patient is different and unique. Our job is never boring. 
Cccs attempt to make us more equal 
I enjoy working with students and families. 
Variety of work settings is a significant strength. 
Grassroots efforts of SLPs to make positive changes
Primary Specialty first recommended by physicians for most patients and pediatrics with significant commjication impairments
The work we do for our patients
changing lives of our clients and their families
Fellow Speech/Language Pathologist agree that we are not respected in all professional setting.
Excellent career with longevity and variability
Some flexibility, meaningful career 
Most SLPs I know love their job because they are true helpers by nature, and this is what gets them through the less desirable parts.
Variety of settings
Can work in more than one setting
Strong local associations, SLP websites and webinars are strengths
Collaboration between SLPs
It is a significant strength that our profession has so many areas in which we have opportunities to work. I have worked in the schools, nursing homes, Rehab Hospitals, acute hospitals for children and adults, and an ENT Clinic. I’m retired but am missing the work, and may return.  
I have been in the field for 40 years and have been in the public-school sector and the private sector.  I feel that overall, our profession is strong within its ranks. We support each other through many media and social contacts.  Through the various medias and ASHA contacts, continuing education is available readily and is becoming more affordable.
versatility within the field
High case load with high work load is a significant weakness
Flexibility of setting
ASHA ‘s poor support at state and district levels to ensure and advocate for ethical caseload/ workload in the school setting.
The work we do can be rewarding 
Diversity of where we can work 
The ability to collaborate and brainstorm innovative ideas to the problems facing the field such as high caseload within schools, burnout, and attempting to treat mixed groups within a school setting
The variety of settings and populations we can work in within our field is a significant strength
I love the flexibility of our field, the diversity of our scope of practice and work site options.
The SLP community is incredible. Intelligent and thoughtful individuals who are willing to help each other and share ideas and perspectives.
I am grateful for the community we share as SLPs
scope of practice is massive especially for school based SLPs
How hard SLP’s work and how much they care
Shared materials and knowledge on social media sites
Support and availability of continuing education via the internet is a strength in our field.
ASHA takes a lot of money from us for SLPs to not get much benefit. ASHA needs to get it together and do some real advocating, especially for those of us in the schools. We need real pay and decent workloads. We are DROWNING.
Variety of job opportunities (setting and part-time opportunities)
Flexibility to where we are able to work. 
Versatility is a strength and a key character trait for SLP's unrecognized. 
requiring CEUs is a strength, but the cost of The Learning Pass is too high. They could/should  be free with our dues.
We have a large amount of knowledge.
Diversity of employment settings.
  ASHA needs improvements with assisting with updating SLP based expectations in the work environment. 
Flexibility, valuable/rewarding work
Work place flexiblity, e.g. the ability to be employed in a variety of work settings (health care, private practice, schools, research)
There is a lot of good research going on 
The fields of SLP and Audiology are really interesting and professionally satisfiying fields.  I enjoy working in this profession. That's the only reason I continue to be employed.
Myriad fields an SLP can work in
After hiring new OT grads, I have seen how valuable the SLP CF year is to new grads. Having a year of supervision and support is a significant strength when used appropriately by employers. 
Flexibility in job placement (medical, school, clinic, etc.) and flexibility in hours.
The breadth of opportunities as far as settings/populations to work with is a strength of our field. 
Our field offers a wide range of job opportunties because of the diverse population we treat as well as a variety of settings we are able to seek employment.  It is a very rewarding field.
I appreciate that our field and education provide us with the base knowledge and ability to work with many populations and settings throughout our career
I like that we have options as far as employment/employers.
Caseload and workload numbers/responsibility in the schools
ASHA member should have access to all research and journals free with membership.  The research is a strength access to it is a weakness.
Dysphagia evaluation and treatment
I enjoy my job and the students I work with. It is rewarding. I have summers off, and a schedule that matches my children's school schedule.
This field is full of caring and I intelligent individuals. 
Flexibility, in terms of working environment (Private practice, clinic, healthcare, education, etc.). Unlike some degrees, such as teaching, where there is limited flexibility to use the degree/profession.
I'm tired of hearing about diversity. People are adults and make their choice as to what profession they want to pursue.  Our pay sucks.  SLPs in public education should make more than professors.  ASHA has not fought for us to get higher wages.  
The increase of pod casts, etc.. through social media to gain information
That our membership covers Jack squat and we can’t even get research articles without paying for them.
Ability to work in a variety of settings with a variety of types of clients
I think a significant weakness is a lack of diversity within our profession and education overall.  
Our scope of practice and the variety of settings where SLP services are utilized ensures job security.
We do have a wide range of settings to suit different preferences/interests
Most SLPs that I have encountered are intelligennt, hard working  people whi go above and beyond expectattions. 
The unity of the SLP community is the biggest strength
Somewhere along the lines of this field we became a catch all.
Being able to provide services to various ages with various disabilities
There are a lack of SLPs in the public schools so it’s easier to get a job . 
flexibility to work in various settings, job opportunities, flexibility to work with variety of populations and age groups
I think our education makes us an important member of an educational and medical team.
SLPs tend to support each other; being in demand does allow for a SLP to choose where the would like to live and work
I think opportunities in our field continue to be available across all settings.  Becausse of our broad knowledge base and preparation in our educational institutions, it continues to be easy to work in a variety of settings throughout one's carreer.
The graduate school coursework and experiences are a strength in our field. I felt prepared to enter the work force upon graduation.
Variety of settings and populations 
SLP community via social media sharing information 
The only strengths is a variety of settings, though pigeon holed into only slp specific jobs and never considered for other roles, and rewarding to help people 
variety of clients, opportunities for employment in varied settings
We are an incredibly talented, bright group of people who are likely as brilliant as doctors but not paid as well or put in nearly such high esteem.
Our scope of knowledge and expertise are stregths to any work site.
The variety of working site, flexibility (but should be more or promoted more so work places understand) 
Job security; rewarding work with students
salary, not valued employees
Same license requirements but a variety of work settings
In our ability to be professional, ethical and cooperative in all settings
I think our resourcefulness, our passion, and our impact on lives is a significant strength of our profession. I wish we were valued monetarily for these things. 
I find that the pay for psychs and counselors in schools is SIGNIFICANTLY HIGHER considering our education, ability to diagnose and treat. Psychs rarely treat and counselors do not diagnose. The discrepancy is inane and needs remediation. We are classified 95+% of the time as a classroom teacher.
I don't feel like the field of SLP is regarded as equal with OT and PT in either the medical or educational settings.
Availability of jobs
We provide an essential service that is well respected among people who know what we do. We care for our patients deeply and have a great community.
I feel like there are more and more available opportunities for continuing ed for cheap or free. I also love the addition of informed slp and others who summarize the research for all of us who are too busy but want to stay on top of things.
ASHA is a tremendous support
Dedication and professionalism
perseverance of our clinicians. 
Significant lack of support for neuroaffirming practice for Autistic and neurodivergent individuals - ASHA continues to support ABA which conflicts with much of what we know to be best practice
The emphasize on continuing education and use of EBP is a strength; however, ASHA needs to take a stronger stand of which courses and tx methods are actually evidence based.
The opportunity to change work settings I feel is greater than other professions such as teaching/education
Flexibility of SLPs and wide breadth of knowledge/scope
often scheduling flexibility
Information provided by ASHA
Having a career with purpose and that promotes the well-being of others is a strength. 
We do not get enough credit in the public for the wide scope of our services and the large numbers of people who utilize our services.
The flexibility, the impact we can have on individuals and families are our biggest strengths. 
Skip
Having the ability and knowledge to work in many different settings with a huge demographic of individuals that need help communicating.
There is so much SLPs can do to support communication and cognition.  
flexibility in variety of places to work and flexibility in hours.
Community feel, well intentioned professionals, empowering for females, male SLPs are appreciated.  
We are kind and hard working! We are diligent in our goals to help every patient or student that is on our caseload
We have the ability to work in a large variety of settings with a large variety of populations. 
rewarding
The biggest strength of this field is that it is interesting and involves improving the communication of others. 
The relationships built with students and the growth/progress they make. 
Ability to work in multiple settings
independent (not ASHA facilitated) networking and support amongst SLPs; social media support in a multitude of areas available to support fellow SLPs
I like our scope of practice, that you can walk out with a degree and have a wide range of ages to work with.
Opportunities to work in a variety of settings, variety of communication disorders and with all age groups 
A sense of community and a sense of doing good for others is a strength of our field. 
Strong graduate programs
We are able to find jobs in the education field.
variety of settings available for employment
flexibility to work in different settings/situations throughout our career
free access to all research articles for ASHA members
SLPs are trained to know their jobs when leaving graduate school 
I can’t think now
Job opportunities exist at least in this state
Caseload vs. workload is a perceived weakness for our field. 50 AAC kids is very different from 50 artic kids.
The versatile areas you have to work within the Field 
ASHA needs to cap the caseload numbers for ethical practice
Collaborations with colleges through other means besides ASHA/social media groups etc.
Ability to work with other professionals (OT, PT, Academic)
Access to research, advocacy for populations 
We are caring, motivated, hard working, dedicated, openminded, intelligent and competent professionals. We tend to go above and beyond our call of duty even under adverse working conditions.
Flexibility and diversity of settings for employments opportunities
As an SLP working in education/peds, I get a lot of satisfaction from the progress I see my students making. I also feel like communication is an inherently interesting topic so often it doesn't "feel like work."
Overall, it's a great job.  School settings are such a nice environment to work in.  The flexibility within the profession to work in different settings is great.  
We have the option to be creative and support our clients and their families in multiple stages of life.
The knowledge base of a well trained SLP is large. There are so many areas we have to be aware of and competent in. The ability to be this smart about this many things has always been appealing to me.
Autonomy, employability, job security, sense of "helping" others
Wide variety of settings to work in
Moderate perceived strength: Job availability, security, necessity.
I feel like the SLP community found on social media is very supportive of one another.  This career has felt isolating due to many settings SLPs work independently, but online (such as facebook groups) have been a positive way to connect with other SLPs and reach out for guidance.
ability to move to other settings, demand for SLPs
Wide open field.    
CEU
Range of settings available. Range of populations to work with. Regulated and researched standards.
We are intelligent, resilient and strong!
The people who enter this field and work as clinicians are passionate about helping people. I also like the flexibility I have about working in different settings and with different populations. I also love that I can choose to specialize in a particular niche if I want to.
Spanish bilingual SLP contributions to our field.
Our strength ps include our rigorous degree programs, preparing us to provide services across the lifespan for individuals with a broad range of communication and other disorders. 
Practical training
Diverse setting and population opportunities
social media speech language influencers have been a moderate strength
SLP are generally the ONLY professional within the education realm who do ALL things compared to peers (case management, direct services, and evaluations). Other SpEd providers only do 1-2 of these.
As a field, we are passionate!!! We advocated, educative, and support our clients and each other. The collab between SLPs is excellent. 
our strength is seen more after pandemic, the importance of our profession is more visible when more parts of the community is affected
SLP's target communication and language specifically in a way that no other profession can. 
Good job security and flexibility 
Our training and background that prepares SLPs for growth and development of skills in ourselves and those we serve
student/patient advocacy
If have enough experience, SLP can move to new city/state and find a job.
support for one another, regardless of geography
The ever evolving evidence based practice we rely on
First, I absolutely love my job as a school based SLP; I actually look forward to going to work and I don’t hear many people say that:).  A huge strength of our field, locally and virtually, is that SLP’s are supportive and collaborative when compared to my perception of other professions.  There are so many highly skilled SLP’s sharing their knowledge just because we all just want to ensure all individuals have access to resources so that all individuals can communicate to their highest potential.   
I feel the education and research are not lacking in our field. There are many studies and published articles to show this as a strength to our profession.
High employability - there is a need for SLPs
Job flexibility
We help people.
The amount of need for SLPs is both a strength and a weakness. There are not enough SLPs to fill the jobs and jobs aren't willing to pay enough.
depth of scope to appropriately assess clients / patients
I feel that ASHA does not do much to support or advocate for us, especially in the healthcare field. I feel isolated and unsupported. Not sure what my ASHA dues are going toward.
Camaraderie between SLPs in the shared suffering of dedicating our lives to a profession that is unable to provide financially in this economy 
SLPs as a group are highly qualified, motivated, and hardworking individuals who are dedicated to making a difference for individuals with communication (and swallowing) needs.
I love what I get to do- helping clients/students is very rewarding. 
availability of work in a variety of settings
I have enjoyed being an SLP for 35+ years.
SLP's sharing their knowledge on social media is a huge strength
SLPs skills and knowledge of a vast array of topics makes them critical members of the team and in ways that are underutilized.
SLPs are extremely well trained and competent service providers and usually very helpful to colleagues in SPED who have much less training and qualifications. 
This field is special in that we can reach people of all ages, backgrounds, ability types and disorder types. 
It is amazing to work directly with individuals and families. The potential for change/growth is amazing. 
slp's innate desire to help people is a significant strength 
The satisfaction of outcomes of clients/students/patients adds value to ones emotional wellbeing and is a perceived strength. 
critical for academic success for many
Flexibility in the field
Many opportunities 
How broad our scope is and how qualified we are to work in various settings
We have a lot of knowledge related to literacy and writing skills with children.
Flexibility in hours and settings; collegial sharing and support; ability to define and redefine the type of caseload within a setting (eg., changing ages and populations served in the school setting without having to change jobs; seeing the positive impact our services provide for clients and their families
Helping the community
Togetherness in our social media circles and leaders in the field moving us forward (not associated with ASHA)
Optional
Neurodiversity affirming practices
I think having a high bar to entry is generally a good thing, in theory.
collaboration of our field with other professionals
We are essential to not only the client, but their loved ones and community
Number of different setting we can work in
There are highly qualified multilingual individuals who are blocked by the gatekeeping in making more money for this added skill. 