Q32
"Are there any moderate or significant perceived weaknesses of our field you would like to
add? Please share here (optional):"
Do not feel supported by ASHA in expecting EBP especially many are mistreated in their facilities by fellow SLPs and leadership for driving change. Do not feel supported by ASHA in enforcing competency in clinicians, salary, enforcing standards of equality 


No


white supremacy culture in framework for everything 
Support to manage caseload or burnout. 
No
Na
The state of undergraduate and graduate education, and the inability to truly specialize or be  adequately trained (especially in regard to dysphagia) prior to being responsible for patients’ health and well-being. 
Lack of unity, lack of diversity, lack of adequate insurance reimbursement for a living wage, lack of support and compensation for high caseloads
It’s really hard to comment on salary data because it is so location dependent, both in terms of wages and COL. I find ASHA salary reports aren’t very helpful because of those differences, and respondents often have many years of experience. 
Lack of adequate training on dysphagia and medical SLP topics
Lack of academic oversight of DEI standards, absolutely no accountability for biased actions from within ASHA and the SLP community 
i dont see any opportunities for advancement 
None
Low reimbursement rates and denials for habilitation codes and therapy caps
N/A 
Poor diversity, barriers to entry, mandating the CFY to force SLPs into lower starting salaries than other allied health professions, not being doctorate level
School based issues (documentation, high caseload/ workload, expectation to work outside of contracted hours, salary; filling gaps when positions aren’t filled, etc)
…covering the 9 areas in class isn’t enough when our job includes counseling, people of cultures and backgrounds we aren’t familiar with, weak clinical experiences in graduate school, a lack of actual clinical skills. I was told to use clinical judgment in semester 1. I didn’t have any! I didn’t know how to think through a clinical situation. And our kids (i work in pediatrics)  are all over all the spectrums. I needed to know even a primer in PT and OT—all that stuff is related. A course in human development would be great. In sum, a more robust education. 
We need an license for the US that would cover all states so telepractice can be provided without multiple licenses
Mentoeing
Low pay, high caseloads, high burnout rate
A lack of capacity for the ongoing advocacy needed to ensure policy considers evidence based practice and the need for more SLPs in health and education given the abilities and tiers we consult, coach, treat, and support.
Low competency overall across therapists with high levels of responsibility and poor advocacy for our field as a whole. By Asha 
Difficulty finding jobs, significant difficulty finding jobs with appropriate pay or work expectations.
 adequate dysphagia research.  Research on feeding people bipap dependent (taking off bipap, nursing feeding and putting right back on when they desat), no reasearch on hiflow nasal cannula and dysphagia on acutely I'll non ill normals.  (Shouldn't just be our opinion that it isn't safe)   aSHA does not advocate for us near what PTA and OTA does for their fields, what is with all being procedural codes?  You spend 10 min with an ICU patient and they get charged for an hour.   Unethical.   There is no reason we should not be time based like PT & OT.  
We have a lack of professional support through ASHA which is required and incredibly expensive given our salary and the cost of graduate school. 
Medical - education SLP clinician gap - misunderstanding & disrespect in our own field 
High stress, workload

I feel that our field has to continually fight to be acknowledged or accepted at tables where we could be to help clients, in pediatrics and adults. I felt this the most when I was working in the schools. People not even caring to understand what I did but wanting to make continuous demands was frustrating and exhausting. 
The way in which clock hours are calculated for graduate school does not mirror PT/OT. The current model of graduate school limits those who can not be traditional students   
Workload/caseload; systemic issues in the education setting for all professionals (SLPs as well as teachers and other related service providers)
Graduate program did not truly prepare me for the caseload I am working with today. Poor support to increase insurance coverage/ reimbursement, which impacts our salaries. School-based SLPs have caseloads that are too high and too much paperwork. 
There are not enough opportunities to explore specialization areas when in graduate school. You are expected to be excellent and learn EVERYTHING for a test and potentially not use a majority of it again. 

The field is too expansive for clinicians to be up to date on best practice when they graduate. Compared to our counterparts in PT and OT, clinicians are nowhere near as knowledgeable and prepared especially to work in medical settings.  Additionally high quality continuing education needs to be more affordable and accessible. 


None
Low advocacy from ASHA for state caps for caseload
how LITTLE we are respected by other medical professionals 
Caseload numbers are not monitored or capped in most settings 

Trying to broach the gap between research and service provider is difficult due to time constraints and a lack of acceptance. Far too many clinicians are practicing with outdated information. School age research, especially regarding language development, is sparse. There is still far too little information on certain cultures including typical language development.  
ASHA’s cost and lack of support given to SLps

There are many weaknesses. There are many SLPs who are complacent. They do nothing beyond their typical day. They do not keep up with research. And they influence our new graduates by providing inadequate mentorship. So the cycle of inadequacy continues. Further, there are professors teaching who are not up to date on research, which hinders our field. ASHA has no guidelines in place to prevent SLPs from changing positions freely when they are not qualified to do so eg. School based clinician taking PRN or even FT jobs in health care without training. ASHA does not monitor the type of CEUs taken by SLPs. Many SLPs look for free CEUs that have nothing to do with their current practice. FB forums are filled with advice that does not meet current standards given by SLPs who again are outdated. I never got into the salary discrepancies among PT OT and SLP and more or less accepted that I was paid less. But salary issues should be addressed in some manner.  I really don't know what an adequate salary should be. But salary was just never my priority. Maybe it should have been but it wasn't. I focused on clinical issues. But I know there are individuals out there who will fight for better salaries. But do complacent SLPs deserve a better salary?  Our field is underutilized in many facilities.  I never had a problem being underutilized but many physicians do not recognize what we do. Productivity is a huge issue. I'm glad I'm retired and I don't have to face the demands of the job which focus on making money for the employer and patient care is secondary. 

Yes-the emphasis on research or research potential and grant securing specified in faculty postings. There is such a power differential between those of us who teach and those of us who research. The former is not valued like the latter in higher education.
Lack of support for advocacy in educational settings. Caseloads of over 80 are all I have known in my 3 years of working. Services provided aren’t always the highest quality because the demands to just “check a box” in the education system. This results in inappropriate service models (groups of 4-5) and burnout. I often feel like I am putting band-aids on bullet wounds in the school system. 
Ableist practices within our field represent a significant weakness. 

Working environments & expectations are not always as professional as needed, clinicians can easily be exploited due to variety of weaknesses such as being alone/limited team work, ambiguous rules for some things & reliance on first job for CFY supervision causes a relationship that can be exploited as well as wage disparity which can lead to financial exploitation 
1. Low pay compared to the amount of education, and continuing education, required. 2. Excess of paperwork in the school setting.
Reimbursement from insurance companies for early intervention services; pay rates versus comparable therapy professions like OT and PT
Poor benefits, no caseload caps and job conditions
Whewwwwww! White supremacy, upholding the patriarchy, racism, ableism, pseudoscience, conflict of interest, favoritism, perfectionism (goes back to white supremacy), transphobia, homophobia, treating while scared, standardized testing, implicit/explicit bias given all of the aforementioned 
Large amount of time and money required for school with inadequate pay
ASHA’s “fence-riding” re: basic human rights to fund “bipartisan” legislation. ASHA’s failure to acknowledge that forced-birth may traumatize the birthing individual, which may lead to impact re: child communication, physical/emotional safety if forced to live with an abusive person (e.g. the partner who forced the pregnancy), etc, etc, etc. ASHA’s high cost of membership w no continuing ed, poor legislative/practical outcomes. Culturally-insensitive (entitled), underprepared, socially-competitive SLPs. Poor clinical supervisors. 
Recognition and training for dysphagia at the college level
We have a tendency to bounce from one fad to another. Too many SLPs do not understand the science behind our field, this is largely a reflection of grad and undergrad curricula. 
Significant levels of documentation and paperwork without auxiliary support. 

Considering the percentage of SLPs working in schools, I feel ASHA doesn’t do enough to help us advocate for ourselves 
No productivity or caseload standards
Currently exhausted and burnt out in my first year so I don’t even know what to put here. Weakness in the field would be providing new CFs with the necessary training and tools to service a variety of clients
Many recent studies seem designed to determine how poorly SLPs do their jobs. Unhelpful 
Contract companies/teletherapy companies prey upon SLPs’ desperation to leave the intolerable demands of full time district positions. The pay low rates and poor benefits which then undermines the compensation in the entire field. We need a high quality, centralized, free service that helps SLPs draft their own contracts to contract themselves to districts. Like a legal zoom but for SLP contract generation. If it were easily accessible and reliable I think many would use it and we would have better standing to demand higher rates.
Lack of standardized curricula, limited standard treatment protocols as there are in teaching or in medicine. Speech therapy is wildly subjective.
We are the experts in speech and language and yet few of us understand the difference between phonetics and phonology
There are not enough university programs to support our growing profession and getting a masters degree is way too expensive. SLPs are not able to flourish within the confines of the U.S. school and healthcare systems. Insurance reimbursement does not reflect the value of our services and our professional organization is not advocating for us in meaningful ways (like increasing insurance reimbursement, student loan forgiveness, decreasing cost of tuition, and improving working conditions through caseload caps, etc). Dues are way too expensive and do not come with meaningful benefits. ASHA has also shit the bed on representing the public image of SLPs with tone deaf and insensitive responses to social issues. School based SLPs are overworked and underpaid. Our profession is full of amazing, smart, talented people who are getting burned out.
Insurance reimbursements. We should be paid per unit just like OTs and PTs. They receive higher reimbursements and are therefore paid more. Why do we have untimed units? We’re providing therapy services just like OT and PT. 
More advocacy needed for SLPs to treat within the scope of psychiatric conditions. Many SLPs are wrongly under the impression that this is not within our scope. Also, more SLPs need to understand ethics in obtaining informed consent and not erroniously documenting declination of treatment recommendations as non-compliance. 
Significant weakness: SNF offering me jobs as long as I have a pulse and a license … regardless of the fact that I’ve never worked as a medical SLP
There is significant disparity between what is reported for salaries and what the reality is. I feel there is also a significantly unrealistic expectation for salary in the field, too, based on location and demographics, funding sources, cost of living, etc.  Additionally, there is a lack of power to influence the multiple systemic problems SLPs face: inequality of salary compared to education and training, abysmal work-life balance and workload expectations, and ridiculous doctorate requirements to teach upcoming SLPs (university level) that favors academia over real-world knowledge and experience. 
Broad areas within our scope, including extreme differences in education vs medical practice. Lack of education, awareness, & patient advocacy in the diagnosis & treatment of dysphasia.  Poor acknowledgement of medical SLP reputation associated with incompetent treatment of dysphasia causing more harm than benefit to patient & families entrusting us to maximize potential with our education & expertise.  
No set workload limits and outdated tech / billing systems significantly worsen our practice

Lack of awareness and execution of scope of practice
The lack of clarity about what needs to be learned during student externships as well as CFY so that CFYs seem less prepared than our PT and OT colleagues 

No major unions or form of advocacy for SLPs with high caseloads in schools or high productivity requirements in SNFs

Low pay relative to our expertise and education, poor Medicare reimbursement without COL increases. ASHA should be advocating hard for pay increases rather than reducing the amount by which our reimbursement is cut.
I think our title as speech language pathologists isn’t necessarily reflective of our skills, our breadth, and our depth. I think there are so many other seats (e.g., mental health) that we should be at but our field moves so slow that for ASHA to be at that table saying we should be there too…we are always a decade behind. 
Transparency amongst business owners


Not enough organized collective action
Caseload/workload/productivity expectations across settings; expectation to do unpaid labor / take work home; prevalence of contract companies / PRN roles in lieu of full time salaried direct-hire positions; lack of SLP-specific union representation in schools; poor wage growth on school pay scales; lack of accountability & support for ineffective/unfair graduate student supervision at community sites; lack of graduate student placements in some settings across the SLP scope; 
Lack of diversity in terms of people with a Disability
only requiring 10 hours ceu a year. not holding members accountable in keeping up with science, members practicing outdated 
Rampant ableism within our field 
lack of appropriate training to understand medically complex patients, lack of ensuring quality clinical placements, lack of rigor for profession as a whole
Limited room for career advancement after CCC, high caseloads and productivity expectations 
Our graduate school training is too broad. The medical SLP has much too little training/education in graduate school and is poorly represented by ASHA. 
You have to work yourself to death to make a modest living. In many places you would struggle to make ends meet if you were trying to provide for your family alone. 
Length and content of graduate studies and clinical practica
The discrepancy in requirements for state licensure. 
I am required to belong to my teachers union but many contract protections don’t apply to me
Salary, stress. Other than dysphasia-related issues, there is no such thing as a. speech and language emergency
The field is not welcoming and inclusive for non white, non female, non neurotypical individuals. Examples include grad programs treating males and minorities like “unicorns”, SLP materials being hyper feminine, etc. 
Lack of direct support from asha. Lack of explaining what exactly our annual dues are doing to directly support its members. 
Lack of insurance reimbursement is a significant weakness. ABA providers obtain 49 hrs/week and SLPs can barely obtain 1
Not enough graduate programs to keep up with the demand for SLPs - especially in the school setting
Reimbursement rates, salary, reliance on EBP only
School caseloads & unreasonable expectations, not understood or respected in schools
Demands on production

ASHA needs to advocate for caseload caps to ensure better working conditions for its members. We also need to increase the diversity within our membership in order to better treat our patients. 
I think a significant weakness is the attraction of this field to specifically high dispositionally neurotic YAVIS women without any tools or discussion about the mental health consequences of those traits. Psychology has the same problem. No one who isn’t like this wants to be in this sorority and we need to cede some space to make a pool of clinicians not characterized this way 
I think the salary data is inflated. I have my MA and took 30 additional credits to advance in the salary schedule in my school district. I make $61,600 as part of my school contract, and this is my 9th year as a school SLP.
Na
The lack of benefits (retirement, paid time off, health insurance) with many positions.
Weakness- lack of representation in leadership roles across settings
False perception that working in the schools is a good setting for working parents/raising our own kids.  The impossibility of sticking to contract hours, imposter syndrome leads to endless CEU courses I take all summer.  The scope of practice is too big and I am always feeling incompetent - don't have the luxury of declining to service a student due to my own clinical weakness. I hunker down and learn what I need to on my own time to give that student what they need.  The quality of the CFY experience is a big problem as well - my supervisor was terrible - unavailable and unhelpful but I was afraid to speak up as I needed her to sign off on my CCCs & license
Pay varies greatly , there is no standard. SLPs incorrectly classified as 1099 providers 
The lack of advocacy and support from administrators, supervisors, educators, and politicians is something that needs to be addressed in order to help working SLPs.
Educational slps are not treated with the same respect as bcbas or school psychs. Lower pay and no seat at the table when discussing systems/policies or even client needs. Also, educational slps are told cognition is psych but psychs do not provide intervention and sometimes recommendations based on cognitive needs. This harms so many of our clients 

Lack of salary and prestige for all our years of education
Inadequate pay, frequent burn out, high cost of licenses and CEUs
We aren't paid as well as other masters level professionals, and we are continually overtaxed in terms of workload, especially in the schools. 
Even physicians don’t really know what we do; one described our field as a “black box”.

Significant weakness in graduate/training programs re: ethics, billing, working within the healthcare system. No option to take more courses about particular areas of interest.
ASHA is not an effective professional organization.  I want ASHA (and the money I pay every year) to advocate for our professions, take funds from only soundly researched practices and companies and make strong statements when needed (e.g. think of their response to facilitated communication).  Caseloads in schools are ridiculous to really be effective clinician.  Without clear direction and oversight, SLPs can accidentally follow poor science.  We also have many SLPs in our field who conitnue to do business as they learned at the beginning of their career which may no longer be supported by science.  The whole BCBA mess really set our field back and pushed our field out of important and valid work.  Insurance companies were readily paying for ABA services but speech was limited to 20 visits. SAD!!!  Also, SLPs tend to be doing so much articulation therapy in schools that they are not at the table when literacy is needed.  SLPs tend not to work on reading and writing in the schools because their caseloads do not allow them to fully function through their scope of practice.
Diversity, ethics, and inclusion. Access to funding. Ableism. 
Level of biomedical training in grad school / required for grad school 
The amount of student loans most SLPs have to take out vs financial ROI and earning potential, along with basically required membership with ASHA and other licensure fees
Limited opportunities for advancement. Wages seem to have stagnated.
To summarize: my major issues with the field are low pay and very little upward mobility
Field has become so broad that it’s hard for school based SLPs to address everything and this adds to stress
We are terrified of not being liked and it has made us stagnant and unambiguous, especially in healthcare. Look, that surgeon isn’t going to like you anyway, you might as well tell it like it is. 
Mean girl dynamics among peers. 
Not having unlimited free access to CEUs 
No
lack of graduate students going into the profession and in the schools

Support from employers/ASHA related to productivity/caseloads and burnout, affordability of undergraduate and graduate programs and loan repayment

There is a problem when doctors or the NY times gets us confused with OTs. People don’t know about is or understand what we do. If they did we may get the pay and respect we deserve. 
Difficulty in specialization in late graduate school, poor evidence base requirement for ASHA-endorsed CEUs, poor breakdown of systemic barriers to increasing diversity in our field
SALARY. An appropriate salary for our level of education in this economic climate should be easily more than 100k a year. Caseloads are far too big and schools can't find enough SLPs partially because why would anyone stay in this profession to make little money for a whole lot of stress.
Salaries are not enough compared to other allied health professionals. We need more advocacy to reduce caseload sizes. Our scope is enormous and I think that's a problem. In most settings, we're expected to be generalists, which means we have full caseloads with a HUGE range of people to serve. How can we possibly stay on top of all of the best practices for all of these clients?
In the schools, our caseload numbers are way too high considering all of our many job responsibilities. This leads to, many if not most, SLPs working into the night and most weekends.  Burnout soon follows.  The consensus of my colleagues has been that a reasonable/workable caseload would be about 47 students per SLP. 
stress levels and significantly increasing caseloads in the schools following the pandemic
Too high of caseload/productivity
I feel that graduate programs for SLP (and other medical and education degree programs) do a poor job of preparing students for interdisciplinary collaboration
ASHA is a weakness - we do not have an organization that effectively represents our interests
Overall lack of evidence based practices in pediatric feeding and swallowing. Lack of respect from other disciplines 
None that ASHA can fix.
What's up with the shortage of SLPs?  I worked with our union to increase pay - 40% more now for those starting off - and we still can't get SLPs.  It's nuts, we need more SLP programs in California, more SLPs graduating, less SLPs leaving the field, and less stress for those of us staying. Also MediCal - can we raise the reimbursement rates? oh, and neurodiversity - not every SLP is a neurotypical type A personality. 
Low salary for level of education. 
Not paid enough 
High caseloads, low salaries
Their help with reimbursement rates with insurances is significantly lacking. AND their response to diversity requirements within their company AND marketing is concerning

Lack of mentorship/training for aspiring med slps
Expected to know too much about too many thngs, it waters down our specific and specialized skillsets
Not enough community awareness of what we do and how we do it which leads to not enough of us and not enough of pay to make it worth going into 
Limited upward mobility, stagnant pay (rarely get raises even for inflation), long hours, working outside of hours 
Undergraduate requirements are a moderate to significant weakness 
Salary
N/A
Possibility of increased pay- it caps out at a certain point 
Low pay 
The inequity evident in how LGBT and BIPOC clients are evaluated, treated (or not treated)
Work/case load stress, very limited professional & financial growth opportunities, 
workload and pay in the schools, insurance coverage for services we provide, preventing ABA encroachment in our fields
Inability to provide AAC to all who deserve it 
The fact that specialization has not been utilized
advocacy for school based professionals
Salary and cost of education programs/SLP degree to become a practicing, fully licensed clinician is a huge problem. Most SLP salaries are not commiserate with education and rising cost of living. Our wages are truly stagnant in many places. 
I would differentiate stress level from caseload/work load. I like a healthy amount of stress in my work place to keep me motivated but drowning in unachievable services due to caseload is something beyond stress. Case load or work load caps. I’ve been hearing a bit about % of workday that’s billable being a good indicator of overwork. 
Not enough reciprocity across state licenses for advancing teletherapy practices 
Long work hours in schools
In my opinion ASHA does not support SLPs I. The areas of caseload or compensation, but does impose financial and CE requirements to maintain CCCs. I see this driving younger SLPs away from ASHA as ASHA certification is not mandatory or supported  in Connecticut public schools. 
I sometimes feel that our low pay reflects that society and the market have determined that the skill isn’t that needed or valuable. I feel we’re employed primarily due to IDEA mandates in public school, rather than the admins really setting us as valuable. I also feel articulation should come back into focus in our field, because it’s popular with the public and I think it could improve our view as useful in schools. The pay deceleration is remarkable. If I didn’t have kids and need the school schedule I’d consider working at the public library front desk or Costco as an alternative. Also, the culture of perfectionism in SLPs is toxic and unrealistic. Most who operate this way will certainly burn out. I am sometimes concerned that graduate programs are training people to be hyper focused on minute details rather than having a wholistic perspective on how to help a client/student communicate.
High productivity standards
Continued decline in job satisfaction of many colleagues in the field resulting from issues such as poor pay (across the board), job encroachment, productivity levels/caseloads, lack of support,  etc. 
Unrealistic productivity standards
For profit companies undercutting each other to get contracts causing decrease in rates over the years; SLPs right out of school open private practices and ask for the same rates as SLPs with many years of experience

So much paperwork and not compensated well for all the time and energy we spend researching, taking data, preparing for sessions and writing evaluations and session notes. 
Too many discrepancies in practice patterns for something extremely critical like dysphagia assessment and management. Why do we still have SLPs thickening at bedside? Why are we still skipping thin liquid on an MBS because we're afraid of it? And recently I learned some of us are asking why we even modify diets at all/there is no conclusive evidence to support that. I feel like I can never keep up with best practice and I am honestly under qualified to be managing dysphagia. 
Workload versus caseload balance within the schools
Salaries at my facility are based on national average however % of raise decreases with a higher salary 

I believe we don’t get enough training for medical side of our field in grad school. It is incredibly hard for CFs and other clinicians that start in other settings to transition to hospitals. It’s very challenging to gain experience in specialties such as head and neck cancer, NICU, AAC to competently provide care for patients that show up on our schedules. Trainings to improve competency are too expensive (my hospital offers $500/yr for CE to full time employees, most courses are $600 + transportation/lodging.
ASHA does not give caseload cap numbers, or even something nuanced like "at caseload levels of x students with x severity of disorders, -% of therapists report significant impairment in their ability to work". Or something like that. We NEED for ASHA to put information like this up officially, so we have at least a bit of support as we fight against unreasonable caseloads.
Lack of communication between leadership and the clinicians; inability to appear in touch with what we do; inability to acknowledge areas where d disagreement 
lack of workload/caseload protections, insufficient reimbursement & education funding resulting in inadequate pay across settings, rampant ableism especially as regards the autistic community/ASHA's attitude towards ABA
Workload compared to other disciplines because our field covers a broad range of modalities

I kind of just wrote weaknesses, obviously the whiteness is an issue. Behaviorism and ABA crap/practices other than neurodiversity affirming are an urgent problem IMO
I feel one of our significant weaknesses is the lack of public education on what we do, which affects salary, potential to attract SLP’s who come from more diverse backgrounds and not over 90% white women.
Poor representation by ASHA to gain professional respect of other professions, manageable workloads, advocacy for our skills and knowledge base (not just advocacy for the hot button areas), helping in states where we could be providing much needed evalautions as EXPERTS in Autism (those who truly arr specialized), EXPERTS in dyslexia (for those who are specialized)- supporting amd comfirming our skills amd knowledge to be equivalent or above foe exqmple, clinical psychs who truly may not know as much but are able to render dx. ASHA rides on old blanket statements that no one reads about Scope Of Practice, but does nothing to support members who invest 10s of thousands of dollars to be.experts, only to have their evalautions denied because we are only "speech."  ASHA is very out of touch what is happening with SLPs hacing caseloads of 90+ kids in the schools and wonder why there is such burnout. There is no voice for us. When i was 25 I had hope of the profession improving to help with caseloads. Caseloads are still the same here with 10 times the paperwork. I have paid dues for 30 years. Nothing has changed, only become worse. I am retiring 10 years early as I cannot continue. Additionally, my hourly rate is now $15 an hour less than it was in 2005. Excuse the typos as this was done on my phone. 
Rampant ableism and paternalistic views 
Burn out rate is excessively high. Productivity standards are ruining outpatient hospital facilities. It is exhausting and does not provide a healthy work life balance. I have been in 2 major hospitals in Michigan and both have lost over 20 SLPs in the past 6 years due to unrealistic expectations and decreased salary. 
The thinly veiled agendas and nastiness of some on social media who claim righteousness but really just want to grow their bases is disgusting.
I am chronically frustrated at the lack of accountability for medical SLPs who continue dangerous/unsafe practices in medical speech pathology. Unfortunately those who do that are now "seasoned" and often in leadership roles so they won't hire SLPs like me who have moved away from thickening liquids at bedside and emphasize instrumentation and most recent evidence based practice. 
Too kind and not assertive enough To fight against being treated unfairly with too high caseloads. My graduate school did not prepare me adequately for doing the job of an SLP. My courses were taught by researchers who had no clue how to actually treat comm disorders. 
Lumped in with teachers and not acknowledged for our medical professional status, our continuing Ed not counted for salary advancement, work spaces for SLPs continue to be inappropriate. Cccs should be equal to national board certification for bonuses, 
Salary in comparison to PT/OT, ASHA’s advocacy in comparison to APTA/AOTA, practice of turning out SLP generalists rather than differentiating medical vs educational tracks in majority of university settings
Income. Caseloads in schools and hospitals. Amount of money to keep up with C’s and CEUs. 
The field continues to become more medically based, with SLPs scoping for FEES, for example, without compensation for the extra training and support. Raises are below inflation, so I was losing money by the end of my career. 
school-based caseloads are too high for even the best SLP to be effective
I think the statement about average upward mobility and flexibility is completely inaccurate, which is a weakness. I know of many SLPs who are making less now than 20 years ago. Our starting salaries are a strength, but there is minimal room for growth within our field.
It’s too subjective-who to treat, how long .. especially in schools 
White supremacy and oppression are upheld through our profession with gatekeeping of knowledge and opportunities, plus poor pay and upward mobility. It ensures that the majority of SLPs are white women, oftentimes ones whose partners or families have money so they can afford to not make as much (from my observations in the public education setting).
Inadequate initial and ongoing training/teaching for work in a medical setting 
The gate keeping at the academic level has to stop. Our demographic distribution should match the population we serve. Our field is intensely white and stuck in the research of nearly 100 year ago. 
Na
Continued cuts to insurance reimbursement and other professions encroaching on our scope due to them getting higher reimbursements 
We are highly educated and experienced, but under appreciated and respected
The scope of our field is too broad to adequately prepare clinicians in a 2-year Masters program.
Access/affordability of CEUs, diversity in the profession, PAY!!!, being expected to be an expert in all 9 areas including specialties
Significantly less pay compared to other therapists and level of education needed and costs to uphold licensure and cost of CEUS are significant.
Overworked, high caseloads in schools, ridiculous productivity expectations in medical settings and ASHA incapable to advocate for its members or even attempt to address. Except articles that list “crying in your car” as a way yo cope. 
The giant variety of our field 
Isolation from frequent, in-person contact with other SLPs in many work settings
Productivity demands 
I don’t know where to begin (-SLPSTUDENTMEMES)
The scope of practice for “generalists” in school settings can be overwhelming. The research & PD are there, but you can’t possibly afford it all in terms of money, time, or cognitive load with large caseloads with such diverse needs. Over two decades in and I feel like I’m always trying to keep up but can’t possibly meet everyone’s needs - including my own, for work/life balance.
Value of our field perceived by insurance companies, healthcare systems and school systems.
Complete lack of diversity and representation, not sure what ASHA does for us, licensing is needlessly complicated, shortage of SLPs has been ongoing and doesn’t seem to be ending anytime soon.
WAY underpaid and misunderstood as a profession
Ability to assess and document correlation between standardized assessments and functional assessments in a way that support validity and value of our services! functional 
High case load, not mant SLPs in rural areas so many SLPs are the only SLP at many schools/hospitals
Going into private practice is intimidating and not really emphasized. I would really love to see it more in educating SLPs at the collegiate level so they feel like they have more options than just school or SNF.
I believe we are involved in too much. This has become demoralizing and useless. No one needs to sit in these IEPs, therapy is never meant to be a life long service, and why is much of this at the public’s expense? The reality is, we don’t have any useful research on any evidence based interventions. I don’t know why we’re now trying to take over literacy, I’m not a teacher, I’m a therapist. We can’t get proficient at anything when we’re greedily trying to grab everything and make it a SLP issue. If I could do it over I would not do this. I have little respect for this profession 
The stress of the school system specifically
Neglecting the importance of orofacial myology, ASHA is not supportive of this area
Full time hours in a SNF, being told by vice presidents of companies that SLPs shouldn’t be teaching cognition to short term care patients 
Our scope is too wide. Like way too wide. And honestly the pay is shit 
The need to pay ASHA
Infringment on our field by aba practitioners
Lack of transparency with salary, job availability (especially in healthcare). Graduate schools not prepping students on how to deal with insurances. No enforcement and regulation of caseload caps in schools. Increasing documentation with decreasing quality therapy. Little ability for salary increases without moving states or moving from CF to SLP.
Massively underpaid across the board. 
lack of caseload cap, unrealistic productivity, low pay compared to other professionals, ASHA in general
significant weakness in work-life balance and standing up to outrageous productivity requirements   
The field is so broad and expansive, at some point it should be divided to go a medical or educational route. Asha is insignificant. Also the field is generally disrespected and misunderstood by doctors, nurses, teachers, principals, etc
No
Salaries are abysmal. 

Over worked, underpaid, not heard my other professionals
Group Advocacy, self advocacy 
Getting competency in specialty areas. Overlap of responsibilities with other fields (PT/OT/ABA)
the corporate partnership between ASHA & Medical SLP Collective is extremely concerning along with the lack of diversity in our field, lack of support within our immediate (toxic) work environments as well as the lack of support from ASHA while working on the frontlines of a pandemic as well as the high rate of burnout and continued pay cuts.
Lack of standard skills needing to be demonstrated to attain CCCs and SLP certification. 
Quantity over quality therapy: too many students/clients. Medicaid reimbursement rates. 
Lack of counseling/psychology training 
Low pay and high caseloads 
High stress, often lack of respect by others in school setting
We are not as diverse as our client base
Lack of awareness of the role of SLP can create a barrier to collaborative care and appropriate referrals. Lack of educator roles for SLP creates a barrier to providing comprehensive training for certified practices in my province (trach, VFSS, FEES, TEP). This significantly affects the level of care we can provide. Additionally, our program doesn’t focus on evidence based clinical decision making 
Unreasonable workloads/expectation of unpaid overtime 
Lack of awareness, lack of advocacy, lack of support 
disagreement and divide in practices 
We serve people with disabilities but we don’t treat our own with disabilities very well. We need more awareness of and opportunities for those with disabilities in our field. As a person with chronic health issues scholarship funding for people with disabilities would have helped keep me from the over 100k in loans I amassed. I was never able to hold outside jobs in school because of my health issues. In the profession I am often treated worse for having disabilities than I outside it (in the education and healthcare worlds as a whole). Insurance reimbursement needs your help addressed or half our field will implode in the next 25-50 years. 
Shortage of SLPs, declining respect for adults in aducation, high workloads
On the other hand, the shortage of SLPs has led to increased caseloads which leads to many SLPs leaving the profession. 

Shockingly high and unethical caseloads. No regulations in school system with regard to caseload/workload. 
Little differentiation between SLPs and other staff (i.e. "teacher" or "tutor"), significantly lagging wages when considering required education and certification maintenance, significant weaknesses in provision of workload caps, ongoing burnout
not at this time

No
No advocacy from ASHA for anything meaningful.  Pay is too low, caseloads are too high, its not sustainable 
Over emphasis on EBP to the exclusion clinical reality; militant rudeness between slps with different perspectives 

Difficulty retrieving information from ASHA/accessibility of info; increasing amounts of documentation, esp in educational settings
Poor critical thinking and no standardization of advanced skill sets to determine competency or ensure quality care; no incentives to advance knowledge or specialty skills ($ raises).
Poor diversity and representation within the field. Difficult for individuals with disabilities to successfully access the programs and obtain a degree as well. PD offerings and research also significantly lacking representation.
I feel that my ASHA dues are a waste of my $
Low pay with rare or lack of pay raises, focus on quantity over quality, overwhelming documentation that's often unpaid time, ASHA is a waste of money, other skilled therapies have higher wages, SLPs are grossly undervalued and unappreciated including by their own employers
People graduate having no clue about what ASHA actually does and then they get angry when ASHA doesn’t do something that isn’t their role (I.e. state associations). 

I feel like other professionals do not respect our opinions or clinical judgement in both the medical and educational fields 
Productivity standards
our clients in schools are not getting what they deserve due to workload. 
lack of universal goals system (goals can be very subjective); he necessary to complete CF year even if achieved significant number of treatment hours and setting before graduating (other therapy disciplines don't require CF year and are fully certified)
ASHA could do more to advocate better pay, mandated caseload/workload caps, and block infringement on our scope of practice by other professions
There is a weakness in the diversity of research performed within varying populations and SES groups making it difficult to adequately serve each group ethically.

I don’t have enough time or space to list them all here.  Stay tuned!
We are not compensated for the work we are doing. There is no reason that OT and PT in the medical setting should be making more than we do. I should not be able to be a manager at Taco Bell with no experience and make more than what I do in a hospital with a masters degree. The cost of grad school is too high. I got a raise of 1.50 an hour for the first time in 8 years while OT got a 3 dollar raise and PT 3.75 it’s ridiculous. We need advocacy and awareness and to be compensated for the work we do. The absolute price gouging of a masters degree. The absolute inability of ASHA to ever have a clinician focused assistance while they condemn some so publically but have others with multiple complaints against their license never touched. ASHA charges astronomical amounts and we are beholden to them to have our ccc. PT and OT don’t have near the dies we play and they don’t pay them as often- they also gain access to research with their dues while ours are gate kept for more money. The disparity between what Asha workers make and what a clinician makes is a scam. 
I feel like our scope from our degree is too broad with the expectation to be comfortable in treating 9 different areas of communication across the lifespan. I believe we would be more prepared, capable, and effective if our scope/specialization was more narrow, facilitating more expertise in a smaller scope than what I felt was more general knowledge across all the areas.
We need our own union. Lumped in with teachers when we are more like PT or psych in our training
Field needs to move to Clinical Doctorate to expand skills, knowledge and decrease dependence on ASHA as leadership
Advocacy in the medical field for what we do. 
Pay is too low
Lack of advocacy for our profession in all settings 
Stagnant insurance reimbursements
Lack of upward mobility, poop advocacy from ASHA are my biggest concerns
Horrible advocy from leadership, constant fighting for reimbursement, ccc cost to high with minimal benefit, CEU too expensive, pay is a joke, education is expensive. Love what I do but what i make cersus what I spent and currently spend dont add up and something needs to change. 
Lack of respect & acknowledgement of caseload demands in the school setting
Work/life balance 
The paperwork load required in our district is out of control and the slps are the only ones who treat, test, provide prevention and have the highest caseloads. Although, I will say occupational therapy is on the rise but they never are case managers. (In public school settings) 
Cost of living raises, benefits, productivity, reimbursement, caseload, access to instrumental swallow studies, bureaucratic/corporate standards set by non-SLPs, encroachment on our field from other professions. 

Workload- including caseload numbers, hours, and paperwork- is a significant weakness. SLPs are way overworked. Another weakness is when supervisors attempt to micromanage us- that is especially frustrating since we are independent practitioners.
Not enough pay/reimbursement for our expertise, not enough advocacy and awareness to the public about what we do
Lack of opposition to ABA, ableism, graduate students are not prepared for the real world, ableist recommendations pertaining to neurodivergence.
Na
SLP only billable codes

1) workload/burnout, particularly in the schools; 2) recruitment and retention of new SLPs entering the field

We need to add courses regarding giving feedback/results to our patients. Mental health and SW professional have clinical courses and we need these as well when working with adults and children. We are often discussing highly personal information that will impact them for the rest of their lives. Also I feel because SLP area is so broad we are often over stretched when in the clinical field. We are often prepared in school with unrealistic expectations when in the work field and left scrambling looking for ways to assess and monitor progress without standardized assessments unless we buy them ourselves. 
Colleagues not using EBP
There are so many systemic issues that lead to burnout across settings.  In pp, insurance reimbursements are too low, so SLPs either need to see a huge number of patients or are unable to provide equitable services.  In healthcare, there's productivity requirements (for much the same reason).  In schools, caseloads are impossible to manage, and while benefits can be great, pay is terrible.  In these instances, the wide scope of practice is a weakness because you really can't expect a generalist to know in depth, up to date information on stuttering, AAC, CAS, etc. and maintain some semblance of work-life balance. I don't see there being a relatively simple fix; these are systemic problems that will take a lot of time to solve.   I also don't agree with how ASHA-PAC uses its money.  Looking at the congressional representatives who benefit from the funds, many of them of are working against the ethos of our field, promoting anti-women, anti-LGBTQ+, pro-gun legislation and more. I don’t think the ASHA PAC donates anywhere near enough money to these reps to actually influence their opinion, so it’s just money down the drain.
Impact on quality of lives for ourselves 
Our caseloads are too high in schools. The paperwork is ridiculous. The kids are not getting the kind of services they need. We are stuck on teacher pay scales.
SLP salaries have risen according to inflation rates, while the cost of the degree has skyrocketed far above inflation rates. The clinical fellowship is an outdated requirement that harms entry level clinicians and employers, since graduates have to take any job they can find that “will consider CF,” while employers wonder whether they’ll leave as soon as they have CCC-SLP.
Salaries are stagnant.  I changed careers and began my research on salaries 15 years ago.  At that time the SLP Staley was what I was earning in business and it is still the same.  Devastating to the field. Also, the lack of clear EBP among so many issues.  There needs to be one source that automatically sgphares the most recent research without having to weed through journal articles, our profession is too hectic for that.  Additionally, productivity ratings need to be highly focused on.  Other than healthcare I can think of no other profession that does not allow for planning or documentation.  It’s absurd 
College courses do not adequately prepare medical SLP's. Need more dysphagia training, coding, medical terminology, eyc
Inability to move forward with the research that is available resulting in archaic dysphagia or stick patterns in a large variety of adult settings 
A lack of support for caseload management and caring for SLP's quality of life. Our salaries are poor compared t the amount of work we're required to do. I work nights and weekends without additional pay.
Education has become a litigious field and SLPs spend as much time writing legally defensible reports and meeting with advocates and lawyers as they do treating students. 
Ableism, acceptance of diversity 
Low pay and upward mobility for the amount of responsibilities we have as professionals, low diversity and inclusion, poor upward mobility to both clinical and non-clinical jobs, low salary, poor benefits when hourly rate is high, outdated stereotypes of what a speech pathologist should be, advocacy and training for new speech pathologists, respect from other professionals in the clinical setting that are not speech pathologists.
Yes! Please also focus on the damage that large contracting companies are doing to our profession.
The gap in knowledge, there are SLPs practicing with no knowledge of AAC, cultural diversity, linguistic diversity, neurodiversity who are not open to kind and constructive criticism and it makes this field contradictory and hurtful to those we serve. Those of us advocating or being passed for promotions for being “difficult” even though I am the only bilingual SLP in my entire 25 SLP team, in SAN DIEGO! Also workload is too high so burnout is huge. I treat 66 kids a week and I know there are SLPs who do even more. It affects quality of therapy and personal well-being, ASHA should be advocating for this for us 
The prevalent lack of knowledge and awareness of our field in general. People tend to recognize PTs and OTs, while SLPs are often forgotten. I think we should change the name of our month, “Better Hearing and Speech Month”. It doesn’t do us justice and it comes across as ableist. As a minority & bilingual SLP myself, I think it’s crucial that we bring more diversity to the field. Graduate programs are too selective and expensive for many students coming from diverse backgrounds. I am tired of seeing ASHA make statements about diversity, equity, and inclusion without any apparent change. The hefty ASHA membership fee should include access to CEUs and ALL research articles on AJSLP- I often feel frustrated when I have to shell out even more money for a research article I have found on their database that is not included in my membership. 
Low upward mobility, high stress level, inequality between high workload and low pay, low interdisciplinary respect in the field, low diversity and inclusion in the field, poor working conditions, outdated stereotypes of what a speech pathologist is in the clinical setting. 
We need stronger research with proper data collection. We need to look at work life balance
More emphasis on private practice ownership
Need to do better with getting digestible and relevant research to practicing clinicians
Poorly equipped CFs 
Even though we have a big scope, we are too nice.  It’s as if we want to target all the things and be the “savior” (like executive functioning).  Then we have big caseloads and forget things like you can’t “cure” executive functioning.  We don’t have a magic wand.  We also then focus on what would help us look like a savior (like ABA for Autism) and how to do it quickly and forgetting that there are no quick fixes let alone cures.  I work primary with students who are Deaf/ Hard of Hearing.  I passed the LSLS exam only to realize later that this is not the way to go.  I am unlearning/ relearning how not to be an ableist (and mess up daily).  Also my district has to a of assessments for children diagnosed with Autism and not one for students who are Deaf/ Hard of hearing.  The one I want I can’t even purchase in the US, there are so few anyway.  How do we have so few assessments for sign language?!?  It boggles my mind.  I get emails all the time from other SLPs who ask for help because they have such little experience and/ or knowledge working with students who are Deaf/ hard of hearing.   It’s like if we can’t “cure” something, what’s the point?
We are necessary service providers that are underrepresented in our workplaces and therefore underpaid and not adequately compensated for our experience and education
insurance reimbursement rates - significant weakness
Everyone assumes being an SLP is a fun, low stress job. 
The abhorrent lack of respect for our recommendations and expertise with doctors is disheartening. More often than not a patient will be dc prior to us getting an MBSS completed and doctors do not want to hold anything for speech. 
The BS in nursing homes is unreal yet nothing is being done about it. 
Pay should be higher, high burnout rate
Diversity
Significant weakness is that many SLPs have caseloads that are too high to provide the level of treatment that is needed for clients within our working hours 
Our work environments are a significant weakness. I know many people will say it’s a strength that we have so many environments we can work in, however it’s actually quite challenging to change settings and there can be a major learning curve. Also, at least in medical settings, it’s so hard to get full time hours due to very high productivity requirements.
Caseloads of slps in education / asha increases dues but does nothing for us / their stance is that we should cry in our cars 
In practice, the CF year seems to lead to new grads being more vulnerable to unfair working conditions. 
No upward mobility 
lack of union for home health SLPs in TX

The mismatch between the monolingual-dominant research base of the field and the heterogeneous multilingual nature of our caseload.  There is almost NO room to move up into more challenging leadership roles. There is also a significant gap between what researchers study and what clinicians can actually implement, especially in school-based group therapy contexts
Oromyofunctional therapy deserves more support. Benefits as an outpatient SLP limit continuing education with minimal funding. ASHA charges us for their CEs as well- what a rip off. There are so many new expensive, unnecessary certifications being pushed. ASHA needs to separate SLP from ABA
Caseload/workload issues
Rigor of our graduate programs appears significantly reduced over the past several years; ASHA seems to spend an equal amount of time and resources on SLP-related initiatives as they do on audiology-related issues despite the majority of members (at least 90%!) being SLPs; ASHA seems completely disconnected from the realities of working as an SLP in many settings. The recent BOD meeting minutes clearly shows how absolutely out of touch they are. Salaries have stalled, SLPs are overworked and underpaid and funding a doctorate is nearly impossible for the average person. The fact that the nursing association can obtain FPA for master's level nurses across the country but ASHA can't assist states in advocating for manageable SLP workloads and appropriate pay—embarrassing. Our field is so far behind our colleagues in allied health and healthcare it's ridiculous—athletic training, PT, OT, nursing—these fields embrace technology and more competency-based grad programs. Meanwhile, ASHA is too concerned about regulating telepractice and sticking to some random number of clinical hours to actually do anything groundbreaking. I have been an ASHA volunteer on several different boards and committees over the past seven years and I am done after this year—I am exhausted from donating my time and energy as an unpaid volunteer while being micromanaged the whole time. Anything 'innovative' that ASHA develops is just a money making idea. The ASHA Stream—seems like just a bunch of ads? Heaven forbid they actually provide practical or useful resources. I clearly needed to vent!

Low salary given education, training, and job requirements; Biggest problem with our national voice is that ASHA has no accountability due to structure of organization; Clinicians feel forced almost to be certified and a member for $225 versus $200 option for certification only. That $200 certification only fee is outrageous. Look at another association model. OT certification is $65 every three years, according to my research, and AOTA membership is separate and optional. That makes AOTA more accountable to the OT profession because OTs can either join or not depending on how effective they believe AOTA is.  And AOTA still gets the work done.
Poor ability to integrate research evidence into experiential evidence to arrive at EBP. Also, ASHAs death grip on CEUs is embarrassing- it actively DISCOURAGES interprofessional practices and Whole Heath/medical knowledge!
Caseload numbers and the amount of paperwork in the school system is a significant weakness.
I love SLP. I’d love to stay working as an SLP, but I got a fully remote out of field job in medical communications for more $ than I’d make in 20 years in schools, all holidays, 5 weeks vacation, 10 sick days. Staying with a caseload of 80 in person, no hybrid option for paperwork or flexible start time doesn’t make sense. 
ASHA does very little in terms of advocacy in areas that matter, do not listen to constituents, required membership for most job opps, many outside the field do not understand what we do
Significant weakness in the ability to gain knowledge to transition between patient populations in our field. For instance, a provider in the schools wanting to transition into healthcare may have significant difficulty gaining knowledge of skills they need to learn or relearn as well as update on current topics within other populations. I as a healthcare SLP have no idea how I would transition into peds as well 
Working more than our contract time

Advocacy for raise in salary/ pay
BIAS!! Constant talk of needing more diversity with no real solutions. Degrees are way too expensive for the crap wages most of us make. Other professionals encroaching on our scope and we get *crickets* from ASHA 
Caseload size 
The work load and stress are way higher than sustainable. The pay is not commensurate with our level of education and stress level. The pressure our graduate students are under is also major weakness. 
I have experienced extreme stress in the educational setting -- working 10+ unpaid hours a week and already do not want to continue working as a SLP...
Productivity expectations across healthcare 
Give a majority femal profession we are allowing ourselves to be overworked and underpaid and ASHA just takes out money and provides us with Nothing. Why are SPS being paid less by insurance companies  than other fields that provide TX?

Interstate compact
We are too stuck on policing people’s food that other professionals only think about us as the food police and everything else we can offer gets lost in the shuffle. 

The importance of speech and language skills to an individual.

We have to set realistic caseload numbers for school based SLP’s across the country with real solutions to address the overage.
Our profession is terrible at advocating for working professionals. We are overworked, undermined and underpaid across the board. We do not advocate for healthier, more equitable work environments. 

The inability of charging per unit like our other clinical counterparts. To which holds are hand of providing therapy outside of 39 minutes. The inability to charge for parent education, like in ABA. And the amount of time aba can request to what we are able to bill for. The amount of children on caseloads for schools- iT IS REDICULOUS 
Caseloads and variability of workload in different settings 
Administrators in schools and health care that don't understand all of our job responsibilities and how that related to quality of service when caseloads grow beyond a certain point. I also think that for the first several years of our careers, SLPs are a jack of all trades and master of none, and this affects patient/student care.
Lack of ASHA push for evidence-based practice trends; lack of research opportunities outside of PhD programs; lack of growth; lack of education in graduate school surrounding treatment vs just theory 
We do not have adequate advocacy for our field in professionalism, working conditions, compensation, professional respect, public knowledge of our scope of practice.  We do not share research with others in our field. Continuing education often focuses on theory rather than how to achieve outcomes for our clients. Our CFY program is no longer effective for too many who have inadequate, absent or long distance supervision. It’s time to do away with the CFY and add a year of specialized training resulting in a doctoral degree. 
Lack of access to testing materials that are current and evidence-based. 
PDPM 
Full time status in health care only offers full time responsibility of hours but does not offer full time pay. SLPS are stretched to work multiple jobs to make a 30+ hour week. 
N-a
CF is antiquated. Medical facilities want bodies and are happy to pay a lower rate for a CF but do not want to pay for staffing to support the CF
Lack of support from ASHA, not recognized for what we do which reflects in policies and salaries 
Salary is NOT close to what ASHA describes as average, productivity requirements, interprofessional bullying
Our field has mininal room for growth financially 
Lack of diversity in education, we need seperate area of focus in graduate education (ie medical vs non medical).
Poor department scaling to allow for robust SLP programs across these settings, 
Too high caseloads or productivity expectations make us do our job less effectively 
More support for changing settings 
The availability of reasonably priced CEUs (the data and reality of our income level does not support the average price of the CEU opportunities), access to appropriate testing materials (purchased by our employers) in the SNF and HH setting
I feel like I don’t get anything out of Asha. I feel like it’s ridiculous that we have to pay for resources on ASHAs website on top of the already super expensive dues. The yearly dues is over the top. 
Ridiculous caseloads and forcing ABA in schools; having to cover multiple buildings with barely any time to make a real difference. 
Career growth, too much education/debt for typical salary, weak implementation research
Asha supporting aba, rampant behaviorism and sexism and the false belief that peer reviewed journals are the only valid research 
Advocacy at the leadership level 
The fact I frequently have to leave jobs to get raises and do not get respect for the diagnosing and contributions I make is frustrating l
The school SLP's have huge caseloads, paperwork is a lot and burn out is high. 
Our field is broad and our education focus is narrow. I think we are failing to properly educate our students on the extreme variety of issues that an SLP might see. The clinical fellowship year is a joke and often sets SLPs up both for failure and a significantly lower salary. There are so many more things that I can't even begin to share within this box
Contract companies eating jobs and salary
Inability to grow in your career, lack of upward salary growth across time 
Low entry level salary/employers taking advantage of underpaying CFs vs compensating experience, Ageism, racism, and groupthink "cliques"
Fear based approach to medical area especially dysphagia versus sound measures or ability to analyze risk. I’m a traveler and I see so many different approaches across different settings that I wish we had better tools to analyze risk to have better resources to support recommendations 
In my 28 years in the field, I’ve never once been audited by ASHA. The lack of care about our continuing education is astonishing to me. I’m sure some SLPs are audited but the fact that we don’t even have to list the PD we’ve taken shows suggests they only care about money- not quality continuing education- not to mention that the pay of those who work at ASHA is often significantly more than practicing SLPs . 
Grad programs don't prepare you for how jobs actually are and all the issues we face 
School based SLPs are in trouble.  Overextended, little support, low compensation, and seemingly less support from ASHA.  This group is the front line, and bring ignored
CCCs are non-negotiable to work as an SLP, which forces us to pay a high fee and the average member doesn't feel much reward from this. There are no included CEUs, reimbursement rates keep moving lower, there is little upward mobility or training opportunities to move into management, e.g.... I have heard increasing rumblings of disenchantment with ASHA in recent years and I understand it
Nationally known researchers who do not advertise that they are SLPs especially in the area of literacy. When out in the field many of my team members recommend programs or intervention techniques developed by SLPs, while downgrading my role as an SLP in the schools.
Scope of practice is too large. Crushing paperwork. No time to read/implement research-based best practices, no budget, expensive to hold ccc and state licensure and pay for professional development and materials.
I have seen SLP shortages. With this, schoolsndont know what to do. Schools and department of education acceptinh individuals (e.g. parade and resource teachers) that are not a SLP, provide speech therapy services is a huge concern. Even more concerning is the school district receiving Medicaid dollars for speech therapy services if it is not a SLP providing the services. 
Not enough respect Nd support.  Data and paperwork is more important than the actual therapy and help that is given
Advocacy for less workload and higher salaries 
Lesser importance than Pt or ot
Lack of knowledge from school administrators regarding qualifications for SLPs, cost of membership and continuing education, caseload size and stress in the school setting 
Overworked and underpaid 

The idea that we go into this field to help people rather than for the compensation has a negative impact on SLPs in our long term careers. 
The constant cost of things- ASHA dues, CE
Traditional treatment approaches yielding questionable progress for patient outcomes. Poor SLP representation in leadership positions leads to poor manager relationships and work environments 
ASHA advocating for differences between SLP and OT (ie OTs treating swallowing). Unfair wages.
Cultural competency, collaboration with similar fields
Burnout, lack of understanding of what we actually do, ratio of treatment/paperwork is out of balance, 
Unreasonable working conditions in the school setting with limited to no support from ASHA to advocate or effect change. ASHA should uphold CCC as a national certification that is to be compensated by schools in a manner that is consistent you teacher CAGS.  
Lack of leadership. This is not the fault of individual SLPs but a systemic issue. In the schools, I feel that special education administrators specifically and other administrators need to know more about our role. I am not opposed to leadership that would provide caseload guidelines for school SLP s to follow to limit caseloads. Also for the record, the categories didn’t reflect my current employment well: I am a research coordinator in a state university in an SLP department. I am still an SLP but not in clinical practice and being an SLP was not required for my position. I have a Masters and about 13 years clinical experience in early intervention and schools. I also worked as a research assistant on a non- SLP led educational research project in early literacy for 2 years. 
Caseloads, paperwork and billing Medicaid has gotten out of hand. Those in education that work with life skills students have an even greater responsibility and more work than those working with only mainstreamed students Yet, nobody modifies our caseloads to reflect these students with greater needs. They are unfairly underserved! 
Asha does nothing for me and it's so expensive. 
There is no supervision of how clinicians practice in healthcare settings by a governing board with only one dysphagia course offered in most graduate programs. The disparity in Clinician competence when it comes to dysphagia management is vast. 
I feel that ASHA in general is a significant weakness! They charge huge amounts in dues for what?! There is no common cap on caseloads, they don’t advocate for their members, and they charge ridiculous amounts for continuing Ed. Also ridiculous that the CEU registry isn’t included with our membership!
N/A
ASHA does a poor job in identifying therapy modalities and products that are basically scams. They don’t vet their CEU or anything they allow to advertise both in their publications and at conventions. 


High caseloads, extra duties in the school setting, and overwhelming paperwork 
Training students at the graduate level has become a money making business fir universities. They are book smart and experience short. 
The median salary for SLPs and professors of the field is not representative of all workplaces. I know several SLPs and faculty members who are not adequately compensated. There is also a need to address the workload of SLPs across settings.
Working in the k-12 setting, we are not treated as equals to PT and OT staff. We are not paid as well and our time is not as valued as those professions. 

Advocacy and Publicity about what we do and our importance. Reimbursement rates declining. 
Not taken seriously, lack of respect  
The way CFY is set up makes it extremely challenging for new grads to find jobs in the area of the field they desire, with a good mentor. Often locations like SNF only employ 1 SLP, meaning they can't hire a CF and also have a mentor available. Pay is much too low for having a master's degree. ASHA does not advocate for us to be seen equal to PT/OT. There is little opportunity for upward mobility (a therapist is a therapist). Healthcare expectations (or: productivity, outcomes) are unmanageable. 

SLP don’t have opportunities to move up, are not given the respect, acknowledgment, financial supported, or well known by individuals in related fields. Somehow the ability to walk or tie shoes is more important than being able to communicate and eat by mouth. SLPs are often only able to bill half of what a PT bills and they only have at most 1 more year of school which gives them a fancy title. Similar for OTs.
We lack competency standards upon graduation from training programs as well as diverse CF options with a range of supervisor skills and abilities. Quality control and training support to achieve entry level work entry skills is a significant issue for all work settings 
no caseload cap across the board for all states, way too much paperwork - having to bill medicaid for ALL students even if they don't get medicaid is ridiculous 
Liability, especially in K12 settings 
None at this time.
Overwhelming paperwork
Scope of practice was discussed, but I wanted to point out that while it does give us a lot of flexibility in setting, it contributes a lot to overwhelm and imposter syndrome.
Pay ranges advocacy 
Lack of access to ASHA materials for free to members.
We are disrespected and underpaid compared to other masters level health professions
Willingness from other disciplines to refer, knowledge about SP interventions and outcomes
Asha does nothing to make sure we are held in the same regard as our colleagues and does not take issue with others encroaching on our field 
Pay scale
There are so many therapists still treating/assessing as they did ten years ago without using evidence based practice and are treating unethically. 

Being primarily female, we don't really have appropriate pay rstes compared to other similar fields. CEUs are often all introductory not at a level that will positively impact competency. Interstate  licensure is an isssue. Caseloads (in my state i have known far too many SLPs serving 90-150 students). Id rather see the PAC lobby for those kinds of initiatives rather than supportive individual candidates. It just doesn't seem efficient. I'd  support an initiative that offered a program to a highschool or community college that had a diverse student population that taught students how to be an SLPA and gained awareness of the profession and trained a skill that could lead to an immediately viable occupation that could get a student better positioned to pursue more education if they so chose. 
I think there needs to be a better understanding of what ASHA is responsible for/ has jurisdiction over compared to what state associations have jurisdiction over. This will help SLPs ensure they are advocating to the right group and not wasting their important and limited energy. I also think grade inflation is a huge issue. Student are so concerned about perfection in the classroom that they graduate with little actual applicable knowledge and they burnout in the first 2 years. 

Pay, staffing, underappreciation/ lack of knowledge by other professionals of our role 
I like my job but insurance companies are the devil the pay sucks compared to my colleagues and Medicare is continually cutting reimbursement. Productivity ratings keep raising and Asha keeps taking an outrageous amount of my income to sit on their asses. There is no choice but to be in Asha if you want to work in the field. It’s more than likely not going to get better due to bureaucratic bullshit we can do whatever we want but like they hold all the power. The only way to fix it is to make Asha actually voluntary the way all the ot organizations work or completely eliminate it as an organization.
Not at this time 
No, still in CFY hard to say
Compassion fatigue/burnout, undercompensation, lack of medical training and preparation 
No
See above 
The fresh grads not having the appropriate level of experience and preparedness to enter the field. 
Inability to access MBSS and FEES training. Inability to transition into acute care setting without training but training is difficult to access 
White savior complex, ableism
The cost of becoming an SLP and maintaining that certification. A certain level of privilege is necessary (hence that 93%).
Skilled nursing environment is very unethical due to productivity standards. I left this field seven years ago due to the unethical nature of the job. Also, lack of access to Modified barium swallow studies/FEES studies. My employer will not allow me to schedule clients for MBS due to medicare not paying for MBS while client is under skilled home care services
Ill equipped in undergrad for the rigor of graduate school. Not enough coursework in swallowing. Praxis is a joke.
I continue to be frustrated with the requirement of dues paid to ASHA to maintain my CCC's with very little to show for it. My PT/OT colleagues are not required to pay to their national association, but receive CEU credit for supervising students.  This seems like something easy ASHA could allow. 
Need to spend a lot of $ for ceus to compensate for subpar graduate education, Poor and outdated standards for dysphagia education in graduate school, no opportunities to be fully trained in MBS/FEES when you are a graduate student

Culture of competitiveness; defensiveness 
My experience was in the educational field. Personnel shortages and being told to do more with less was a constant message during my whole career at state level policy and compliance, County and local levels. SLPs have long been underpaid and not supported in these school-based isolating positions. There are too many expectations and scope of practice is so broad it is impossible to meet all the inclusive needs of students.Nothing has really changed in education during the course of my career. High caseloads and lesser support continue to be the mainstay especially in rural and Native American reservation locations. State Legislators continue to pass laws that degrade all services in Public Schools. Ten years ago I was still recommending this as a field to pursue, and it breaks my heart to steer people away from our field and the educational fields now. I can no longer in good conscience recommend SLP as a career. All the infighting in education has stagnated the field. Why do we not have MRI and PET scan info on our students? There is a lack of advancement in reading education - another area of responsibility for many SLPs and lacks professional development and clear scope of practice in schools (we don’t have time to teach reading in schools given high caseloads and broad scopes of practice!!). SLP-As do not decrease workloads in my opinion. SLPs are flying blind with double size caseloads where you are responsible for hundreds of meetings where it may be difficult to capture students needs based on the quality of SLP-A and much limited time in getting to know the student. I found SLPA’s only increased my workload and responsibility to a ridiculous level. Grateful I made it to retirement with as few health issues that I had, and my PTSD from working in schools has decreased SOME at the two year mark of my retirement.
We are not always the best at advocating for ourselves. 
Annual cost of ASHA dues, licensing, continuing education
Minimal opportunity for upward mobility in role and/or pay
ASHA does not actively advocate for the SLPs in the school system to get caseload caps.  There is a significant shortage of SLPs and thus, the shortage affects SLPs in the school systems.  We need more academic SLP programs in the US.
ASHA dues are high and most businesses don’t pay for them 
My state cap for a school caseload is 80. This is too high, and I would like for ASHA and my state department of education to address this. This is too many students along with all of the other job responsibilities (writing ETRs, IEPs, progress reports, scheduling meetings, parent communication, building teacher rapport, etc.). SLPs seeing this many students breeds ineffective treatment for our students and SLP burn out.
Lack of mobility, pay, lack of understanding of challenges of role from management who are usually not SLPs 

Diversity and retainment of BIPOC employees 

Advocating for our field in congress. 
ASHA does not seem to take the need for greater diversity seriously and seems to do quite a bit to gatekeep.
See above 
Unfortunately, what experiences the graduate programs currently offer is sub-par. This is not a reflection of the programs or professors, there aren't enough programs or instructors. I have supervised over 40 graduate students/ clinical fellows since I received my CCC in1975. I can document what I have seen as lack of experience and the foundation in our fields. Students are not prepared for the complexities of our roles. 
Significant weakness in the use of common practices that are used that are likely not improving pt health or wellness (i.e., thickened liquids, non functional cog and language therapy)
Working within for-profit, capitalist systems, with over emphasis on productivity, worsened bc of comparison w PT/OT reimbursements which are larger. Difficulty with access to free current research for my colleagues AND my patients/ families/ caregivers. 
A lot of variance with roles and needing more transparency on rates, little ability to move up positions like other fields, access to published evidence 
Incredibly weak collegiality amongst other professionals whom we work alongside (e.g., CNAs, nurses, DOR)
The SLP subtype is basically type A, white women. People who stay with the profession long term continue their out of date therapy methods. And the overall “the way I use language is correct and the way everyone else does is incorrect” attitude. 
Lack of ASHA's and CAA's rigor with assessing the quality of educators in universities. Lack of accountability for assesing SLP's compentency after gaining their CCCs. 
Our education at the masters level is too generalized; we need to have more specialized fields of study
We need to do better in preventing continued therapy reimbursement cuts for Medicare- we are failing the elderly with cuts impacting snf
Implicit Bias 
Poor advocacy from ASHA, limited upward movement, minimal diversity and EDUCATION about diversity.  As a healthcare ST, i also feel like our healthcare knowledge is significantly lacking right after grad school. We should be required to take a class on healthcare basics. 
Mentorship and pay are severely lacking in many areas. 
Students graduate from school unprepared for the work force. Uneducated about new research in the field and I’ll prepared to support and advocate for patients and families. 
Extremely high caseloads and low pay in the schools
Asha dues are a SIGNIFICANT WEAKNESS, along with cultural competence 
N/a
It should be mandated that graduate students pick a track; peds or adults in order to beat prepare students for their chosen field. 
ASHA not advocating for its members (re: caseload caps, special education legislation, speaking out about specific social issues harmful to our scope of practice. Feel that as an SLP I actively have to seek out continuing Ed opportunities to stay “up to date” and ASHA’s continuing Ed opportunities often do not feel current.
Opportunities for upward mobility and cross setting training. I work in schools and would like to switch to medical settings, but it feels like whatever setting you complete your CF in is the setting you are pretty much stuck in for the remainder of your career. 
Competitive pay across healthcare models
Lack of diversity, and weak diversity initiatives
Options for medical benefits are often poor even though we are healthcare providers ourselves; Practically no labor solidarity in the field  and efforts to organize for better working conditions are few and far between;

I feel that the ASHA dues are too expensive for the minimal benefits it provides. Considering I have to pay more for access to research articles and it doesn’t provide access to free CEUs.
Not enough space lol. Scope is too broad. School is too long and expensive. Don’t make enough money. No opportunities for advancement. National organization doesn’t effectively advocate and is expensive. Can’t easily switch to a different career. Research evidence for what we do is still in its infancy and weak
Minimal representation of neurodivergent SLPs despite our work with so many patients in this population.
Productivity standards, advocating to make sure we are able to sustain our job AND sanity. 
caseload numbers and recruitment of SLPs for the school setting
Not seen as the same competency as OT, PT, and even sometimes RT and RD who don’t get the education we do. We also prepare SLPs working in pediatric outpatient and/or schools significantly better than we do individuals who want to pursue medical opportunities.
There’s no standardization or guidelines to support us when making decisions about service frequency and duration of services for students. Leaving it up “clinical decisions” is not enough; I’ve inherited students that should be receiving more services and it’s a fight to get them more and no guidelines that I can point to to justify. Research is lacking 
ASHA needs to support medical SLP’s more specifically in clearly defining AND defending our role as swallowing specialists in the medical setting. 
Low pay. High caseloads. Stress. Treated with no respect in the school system. Too much paperwork. 
Access to instrumental assessments for swallowing are not as easy to get versus other medical assessments or treatment 
Evidence based practice 
our lack of diversity and poor advocacy at some levels for our profession
Burn out with no support; clinical tools and techniques are not taught in graduate school; 
I’m going to be blunt- the profession is so White
Continuing education to narrow and dive deeper into areas of interest are expensive. Feeling lost as a ped feeding therapist CF
Lack of support working in education setting 
The pay does NOT match our expertise or required education; receiving suboptimal medical training (most of that learned in clinical/on the job) and too many pushes for additional certifications beyond already essentially being forced to be ASHA members paying 100s every year to maintain CCCs
It is my perception after a quarter century in this field is that no one ever advocated for higher wages because they didn't have to. They were white rich women who mostly worked for philanthropic and altruistic purposes and no need for financial compensation. ASHA supports big biz and not us. Their salaries are disproportionate to everyone else's. Lastly, our reported salaries do not begin to describe our hourly compensation. Most of us are working 60-80 hour workweeks without additional compensation and the burden of that extra stress has taken a toll on our existences. It would be nice to know our overall general physical and mental health as a profession. Sorry for the vent! Thanks for compiling this important information!
Lack of SLPs ability to communication professionally with each other and other disciplines
Low pay with high expectations - often expected to work for free because we are “helping”
We are over-regulated and under paid relative to our level of education. Promotion pathways are limited. Paperwork and culture of conformity are stifling. Productivity demands and stress levels are high. Representation is low. Ableism is omnipresent. The field is overly pedantic and stubbornly homogeneous and prescriptive. 
See above. I put it in the wrong spot
This field at this time has created a culture of non inclusivity ~ within practicing SLPs especially 
Many places do not have guaranteed hours so the advertised salary is not achieved. 2) low reimbursement rates from insurance which have hardly changed in the 4 years that I have been in practice. 3.) the lack of SLPs in all school levels so many language deficits fall through the cracks. 4) professors and university supervisors who only spend CFY in the field so have no real concept of what is needed to succeed in clinical practice. 
Asha does not lift the value of our masters degree. Why do you need a phd or something equal to be a good professor. If that’s the case then require PhD professors to have a certain amount of clinical experience too. Many have very little in the subjects they teach. Therefore training is poor. Why do masters level nurse practitioners make significantly more in salary? There should be. One year add on degree for those of use with masters. Not 3 more years. Similar to AUD. 
Payscale, respect and workload are disappointing.
Learning gaps between clinicians effect collegiality.
Stagnant pay over the past 20 years. Intentional understaffing. Limited research regarding treatment/lack of treatment outcomes.  
I don’t feel that my ASHA certification is worth the money time and effort spent. I have to use outside sources to stay informed on research, find out how to treat disorders I am unfamiliar with, and we STILL have to fight to get insurance companies to recognize us as a valid medical service. 
Insurance reimbursement for our services is a MASSIVE weakness. It is nearly impossible for private practices to keep their doors open while accepting insurances without burning out their therapists and paying wages below what clinicians deserve. The salaries in EI are also insulting. I recognize how many systems have to change though to make it so that the work that SLPs do is valued and compensated as it should be, so appreciate you taking the first step to gather data! 
Would love to have more access to new research through ASHA membership without having to pay more
Out governing body does little to advocate for caseload size.  There is a strong bias toward medical settings (probably because there is more money there), and little focus on the unique challenges and needs of school-based SLPs.  Additionally, ASHA does little to address the growing concerns about the need for specialization and appropriate implementation of credentials for 'specialists' (that is, creating credentials without causing additional problems regarding access to services and funding for those services)
SLPs are not highly regarded like OT and PT, why is this? It's a huge weakness in both medical and educational settings in our field. 
recognition and compensation of our skills and value to the education system are a significant weakness
Salary for school based SLPs and caseload size for school SLPs.

I don’t know how to word it, but exorbitantly priced trainings and “certifications” becoming a standard of practice in some places (PROMPT, etc.)
There is a prevalent feeling of a lack of support and understanding for what the majority of providers have to dal with on a daily basis. While the large institutions have more resources and more of a voice in ASHA, those in small and rural institutions really feel no impact other than the demands given to them.
The graduate school training to properly prepare us for certain areas of our field. We should be held as high and equal to that as the PT and OT doctorate degrees. MOST IMPORTANTLY, salary should be equal to that of PT/OT, especially within the schools. And regarding the schools, the caseloads are horrendous. We should not be spread so thin across multiple buildings. There should be a SLP for each building so that we can be more impactful to our students' needs and have time to collaborate with teachers/staff as well perform all of our expected duties while treating students in a timely manner. Grouping students the way we have to due to time and schedule constraints is not helping our students achieve maximum skills. This practice of how school SLPs must operate is just baffling to me and feels like we are just saving someone a buck or putting money in other's pockets, because the focus is certainly not what's best for the students. The burnout of school SLPs is real. I feel it everyday and question of career choice, but feel stuck now. I have a limited private practice but as a single, divorced woman, I need the healthcare benefits and need to survive financially, as well as consider retirement. This field often feels archaic and stuck in how we are viewed as professionals. I wish ASHA did more for the school SLPs to address these challenges. . 
Not at this time.
Having our national awareness month in May is a significant disservice to SLPs in educational settings as this is the end of the school year and not at all a priority for our employers.  We must advocate all year long without help from ASHA.
caseload sizes need to be moderated throughout all states, pay needs to be comparable throughout all states
the lack of knowledge/exposure in educational training programs leading to teachers/administrators who are unaware of all an SLP is able to support;  the lack of change in the field of educational slp that still has services "30min ;  2xwk"; the lack of advanced programs for doctoral level for those who are unable to go full-time.
scope of practice is large
Advocacy for school SLPs regarding caseloads, paperwork, and financial needs. $69,000 isn't the average in my state! Giving more, so called, "free" CEUs for the dues that are paid. Just what is done with all that money anyway??? 
For all the money we pay ASHA, they do next to little to help with advocacy, they RARELY make important statements probably due to fear of looking like they are "leaning one way or the other politically"- but it's leaving members feeling incredibly unsupported. If it weren't for needing our CCC's to obtain jobs, most people would not pay their dues.
Significant weakness- poor academic coursework/therapy skill set training in a highly respected graduate program (many years ago; no swallowing, AAC, evidenced-based therapies, ASD interventions…), asha has not helped school SLPs work across state lines  (must be licensed in each state), expensive $$$ ASHA courses, outrageous amount of paperwork in schools, cannot see what ASHA does for me for $200+ fees every year, limited amount of evidenced-based interventions available overall
Outside of certification (which I need for my job) and tracking my CEUs, ASHA has done NOTHING for me. I tried to use them to assist me in a problem I was having with a CF, and they did absolutely nothing to help. I also think it's difficult to search for research articles.  
Pay varies greatly between states.  I have 30 years in and am not yet at average for nation.
Communication overload is a real thing--we're all suffering from it and real messages get lost
In the school setting we are expected to be the "jack of all trades". More and more things are added to our scope of practice yet ASHA does not provide us with free or affordable CEUs to accommodate what is added to our plates. ASHA members pay a lot of money each year for dues and receive nothing valuable in return. The amount of stress and workload put on school-based SLPs is astounding and it is no wonder people are looking to the leave the field all together. There is no support for SLPs working in the schools.
ASHA should be optional. It's absurd how much it costs and how little it provides. 
Having so many needed areas of knowledge can make it difficult to specialize. The biggest weakness in this field is the workload disparity. We need a reasonable caseload/workload cap and higher pay in the schools.  
Significant weakness:SLPs are the only disciplines that HAVE TO PAY high dues annually to practice. Besides hounding me for my dues…don’t see much point in ASHA. SLPs get robbed annually! 
low salary compared to other allied health care professionals or in the schools not recognizing the certification. Caseloads in the schools are not sustainable, burnout rate is at an all time high. Use of SLP-A's should increase
low pay versus high stress and responsibility, 


Our field has broadened it's scope so much that I think SLPs are experiencing greater burn out because the scope is too large!  Also, the cost of maintaining licensure and CEUs is difficult to maintain given the pay.  For the cost of education and professionalism required, our field should have a higher pay scale. The red tape and piles of paperwork for performing basic functions of our job are often debilitating and taking the focus from serving the clients.  I also wish graduate school had incorporated more of the specific evidenced based trainings and certification so I could receive that training without the astronomical costs that I cannot now afford.  I often question my career choice because of these factors and frequently wonder if I should change careers to something that has the potential for greater income, less burn out, or at least better pay for the stress the work I do.  Private practice training may be a beneficial addition to training in our field with a tightened scope on what we do as professionals.
Case load sizes in the schools are too high.  Significant shortage of SLPs. Using SLPAs as "instead of" rather than "in conjunction with" SLPs--many agencies, private practices, school districts are having 1 SLP supervise and have several SLPAs do the actual therapy....more oversight of SLPA college programs......
Significant paperwork in all fields of our profession that is not addressed in grad school. Admission to grad school relies too much on academic grades as opposed to the whole person.
Grass is greener mentality of SLPs is a significant weakness.
prices are too high for dues and ASHA PAC CEU'S
Our diversity as a field is a significant weakness, especially for those of us working in the schools. The lack of clear guidelines from ASHA on inclusivity and how to accommodate for diversity in assessment of people of other races/cultures/dialects is upsetting. I also feel we have been left out of the current debate around salary increases (I'm in Texas in public schools) and so I reluctantly look forward to seeing my compensation become less than a first year teacher without even a master's degree. It devalues our work and our professionalism and ASHA has done NOTHING of impact to change our ability to either get paid more, or to truly have a realistic workload, in the schools. I was asked if I would be happy if my college-aged daughter wanted to be an SLP and I had to respond, No. I think she can do better. I feel bad for the new SLPs coming into the field and I fully expect most of them will try out school placements and leave within a few. years because it is both the most difficult work setting as well as the least respected and the least compensated in my experience. I would have left 10 years ago, except that I had too many years in the retirement system for my state and it would have penalized my retirement (which I will take as soon as I am able per the regulations). 
SLPs often have difficulty advocating for their workload, duties, and other responsibilities. 
Caseload limits for SLPs in the schools.  Retention of SLP in schools due to high caseloads and high stress levels.  
Disconnect from SLPs in the workplace. 
ASHA's advocacy for school SLPs is a significant weakness right now.  School SLPs are DROWNING and BURNING OUT.  ASHA needs to advocate for a weighted caseload vs. just a number.  We all know that having a student with an AAC device, or a student with significant autism, etc. add more to the SLP's workload than a single sound error child.  Pay for SLPs in the schools is also a significant weakness.  It is very frustrating to work alongside a COTA who has less education and training and he/she makes more than I do with 27 years of experience!
(1) The extensive scope of practice makes it difficult to train future SLPs at the masters level, (2) poor critical thinking skills, (3) work related burdens make it difficult to encourage and engage in professional advocacy, (4) lack of diversity (5) ASHA’s lack of engagement with an evolving field of professionals who seek/propose new ways of addressing old problems
The productivity requirements in healthcare and the caseload numbers in education settings are unmanageable. We already starting to have significant numbers of people leave the profession due to burnout, stress, lack of support, and unmanageable demands. I haev worked for over 30 years and I definitely did a better job and had less stress in the first 20 years than in the last 12. 
Given the relatively high education requirement (masters), for the relatively low return (low salary- I make $61K in healthcare), it seems to me that this discrepancy would make it hard to increase diversity of socioeconomic status. 
Lack of representation of people with disabilities in our field (along with the rest of the health care field)
caseload caps in school setting, medicaid payout has not increaswed in FL since 90s
opportunities for increased leadership or administrative roles within the school system, unless have an additional masters degree
Lack of diversity, lack of clarity for research and treatment of OMDs, our scope of practice should be better known to a wider audience that we don’t just work on speech, but on broad communication skills
Making relevant CEU courses more affordable 
Lack of advocacy for school based SLP regarding caseload, workload, expected roles to fill in the school, and areas of expertise required to serve EVERYONE who needs help with communication
This weakness pertains to the above - opportunities to use our specialized knowledge is often limited, due to the need to provide a range of services in the field (especially in rural areas). This may be desirable to some, but also puts more pressure (usually from facility admin) on SLPs to provide mediocre services rather than referring out. Which sometimes leads SLPs not to specialize because there is no benefit to them time-wise or financially, and this is sometimes reflected in patient outcomes. Also a weakness pertaining to the above - Switching to a different role/setting if desired after years of practicing in one area/s
The difficult processes involved in getting and maintaining licensing in comparison to the salaries we are able to make given those requirements. It is a lot of work for little reward in comparison to other careers that do not require Masters degrees and state licensing, but often pay double or triple the salary we are able to make.
ASHA overall - significant weakness; work/life balance - significant weakness
Although our scope of practice is wide, we are realistically not an expert in all. Depending on your specific job and/or your amount of freedom within that job, you can’t do it all but are expected to do so and we are UNDERPAID. 
No caseload cap in public education, insufficient pay and/or contract hours that do not reflect the workload

Significant weakness is no one to advocate for increasing pay/ Medicare reimbursement, or challenge institutions to provide training to excel or be competent in areas within our profession. 
Wage transparency/salary in general 
Recognition, as compared to OT, PT fields; pay in the educational setting
Pay and compensation, case load numbers and high stress
Amount of work, planning, lack of understanding of what we do

People don’t know what SLPs do! School SLPs are significantly underpaid and sometimes undervalued by their medical SLP counterparts
Lack of knowledge of SLP roles to those outside of the profession. Decreasing salaries for educational based SLPs. The costly and redundant state licensures and requirements to have a teaching certification.
broad scope of knowledge is required to be effective
Weakness of ASHA advocating so that we can uphold the code of ethics.  SLP caseloads in schools are soo high because there is not cap, therefore, when caseloads get to 75- no child is getting good care and the stress level is through the roof.  A friend recently told me she felt like she worked in a speech sweatshop, had 75 kids, evals, treatment not being done, etc. Is a shame.  Also, ASHA does not require permanent faculty at universities. My program runs on 3 fulltime temp faculty members at a significant decreased rate to permenant rates. Our department could not run without us. But CAA did nothing during our site visit.  We are a profession of underpaid professionals and other than flexibility in work setting, and ability to have flexible work schedules, there are not a lot of good for us, lots of good for our clients.  THANK you for doing this  research!
Our education/graduate programs are significantly limited (especially for medically-based foundations). Politics/bureaucracy limit accountability for our educators/mentors and senior therapists, leaving younger therapists vulnerable to outdated practices and ethical dilemmas. Instead of addressing these issues that affect everyone, focus is on “diversifying” our field and creating opportunities in absence of merit further prolonging these issues. 
Low salaries & growing (very large) caseloads 
Stuck in old practices, over worked, burnt out, lacking solid mentorship 
Competition between SLPs rather than working together 
The expectation to have unmanageable caseloads and “figures out” mentality due to lack of awareness of our profession/scope of practice

Caseload sizes, equitable pay, support for SLPAs, ableism within the graduate curriculum, and access to the field for BIPOC individuals 
The difficulty and lack of affordable and free training to switch from one of the big 9 to another.the competitiveness for medical placements. 
Workloads in the schools are insane. There is a huge bottleneck at grad school that keeps future clinicians from joining the profession. We need more quality, accessible programs for students from all backgrounds.
There is not enough advocacy to protect our field and states are considering changing the endorsement requirements to provide speech-language support in a school setting. 
Higher pay within education - the pay is barely livable 
Lack of advocacy from ASHA in the public school systems. We desperately need more uniformity across all public school systems regarding pay, caseload regulation, responsibilities, and guidelines.
There should be courses in graduate school that include special education.
ASHA CEUs are way too expensive and there is no requirement to actually take relevant courses to our practice. 
1. Gender inclusion is abysmal. 2. Very poor training in autism and gestalt language processing. 3. I pay ASHA money to keep my license, that's it, they do literally nothing to benefit me personally. 4. Our workload is SO HIGH. 5. no support for neurodivergent SLPs.
caseload expectations & decreased significance/skill set as compared to OT & PT
We lack diversity in every area. Research is hidden behind paywalls and conducted in ivory towers so far removed from the reality of caseloads with 70-90 students on them. ASHA is nothing more than a database who contributes our money through their PAC to political candidates who are actively against the gender affirming voice care we provide.
Above average stress levels are a significant concern. I am not sure how masters programs are preparing those coming into the field with the tools needed to function in the current work environment (e.g. handling workload issues, handling complex cases and special populations, etc.). This is an area of possible concern. The current climate around professions in the area of education is a significant concern as well, as staff shortages and low morale have major impacts on those remaining in the profession and may discourage others from considering the educational field (cascading effect on workload/stress/staffing shortages).
Lack of standardisation of quality of intervention delivery E.g. some SLPs carrying out evidence based therapy for SSD some just treating all cases as articulation. 
Lack of reciprocal state licensing - ASHA licensure means nothing since there are no reciprocal state licenses, and I don't have time or money to obtain and maintain up to 50 individual state licenses.
I feel that graduate programs focus way too much on the school side of the field leaving those clinicians who want to be on the medical side at a disadvantage. The curriculum needs more adult courses specially adult medical or students should be allowed to choose which path they want to take so classes are more focused on material that matters. In addition, the CFY requirements and CFY in general are a joke.  
Pay, lack of funding for families, low reimbursement rate/write offs from insurance companies
Lack of professional respect among other disciplines, poor pay, excessive caseload numbers
SNF/LTC: unfair pay, no paid holidays (and required to work them), productivity unethical and unreasonable for SLP, limited CFY and SLP knowledge regarding CMS (clinician decides treatment frequency, duration, intensity not the DOR or company based on payer) and limited knowledge regarding SLP legal responsibility/liability to patients, phasing SLP out of field by having OT cover swallow and cognition and refusing SLP to treat aphasia due to no higher reimbursement for facility, having SLP diagnose but not treat due to higher reimbursement for facility with diagnosis, limited job opportunities with employers listing "urgent" jobs for PRN/FT/PT but when apply company states that needs are being met (with telehealth by pressuring fulltime employees to group treat at own facility and telehealth sister facilities stating that they have no coverage), unethical group/concurrent treatment directives from companies, limited materials for SLP to evaluate and treat (frequently only provided a deck of playing cards or pediatric flash cards from dollar store), poor respect from team and other health providers as viewing SLP as adjunct to rehab and not necessary and not part of rehab dept 
In my opinion (geographical area) the field is constantly in need and highly misunderstood. We have medical setting and educational setting shortages all over this region. The stress that comes with both do not equal the pay offered. I often feel like lesser of the rehab fields because of these issues with shortages, over worked/high caseloads and misunderstandings.  
Misunderstanding of background/training and role of SLP in the public school setting
lack of work protections or working standards within work settings
The variety of our settings, lack of research with ability to use bedside without significant cost

Our ability to inform the world of the invaluable work we do, advocate for ourselves and our profession, understand the value of our services and demand it from payers, and have, at least, equal status to our PT/OT colleagues. 
The discrepancy between bachelor’s degree students and the number of graduate level spots in our universities. With no way for SLPA to go back to school if they choose. 
The question about “average upward mobility” was hard to know how to answer given that in inflation adjusted dollars I currently make $500 more than I did 7.5 years ago. Granted, inflation has been exceedingly high in the past two years, but it was significantly low prior to that.  If that is “average” for upward mobility, that is very sad
Pay rate, reimbursement rates 
No support with high caseloads, unrealistic productivity standards, forcing group therapy. Stagnant pay. Lack of career advancement. Having to take broad coursework in grad school not relevant to positions you will be in then lack of in depth knowledge needed. Decreased awareness/respect. Managed by those with no knowledge of field. Insurance denials with poor understanding of slp services 
High value & specialized skills with comparably low compensation
There should be a mandatory CE requirement in reading and interpreting research. ASHA makes everything difficult to access d/t extremely expensive fees for maintaining C's, joining SIGs, keeping track of CEUs, etc. I love ASHA but I do not feel the cost vs benefits are balanced at all. 
Burnout/ dissatisfaction/ stress level
Low reimbursement rates for services, largely unchanged in past 10+ years
There is so much much information related to our field that many specialities could be created.  It is difficult to keep up with the latest information in all areas.  We could benefit from a central place to provide the latest EBP information.   I realize ASHA has tried to do this, but when the majority of the articles are locked (despite the insane amount that we pay for dues) it makes it difficult to really dig into the information.  I don’t feel we should have to pay to be in speciality groups to be able to access all of the information on the site. 
Low salary is a significant weakness.
No upward mobility, high burnout 
Lack of knowledge taught at the graduate level for feeding children, Autism, AAC users, etc

Normalized racism, direct discrimination against SLPs and clients/patients from marginalized communities, lack of opportunity to diversify field and create equitable opportunities
Difficulty for practicing clinicians to get funding for research in the absence of a doctoral program 
That reported wage is so inaccurate… and the upward mobility 
No end of year bonuses; often tied to insurance converse etc
Widespread contract positions with no benefits that force therapists to work multiple jobs that are neither financially sustainable nor stable, thereby causing a lot of mental health issues, attrition from the field/burnout, and poor return on an advanced degree/professional licensure. Clinical fellowship year that often harms more than aids new clinicians because they are taken advantage of. Lack of education about insurance, reimbursements, and advocacy in undergrad and graduate coursework. Working clinicians are often so overworked that they don’t have time to actually advocate for themselves and influence legislation that heavily impact this field and its reimbursements
We should be considered part of the mental health umbrella, we should have more control over what insurance (and other funding agents) choose to cover as well as reimbursement rates.  Too many people think we only work on articulation and fluency.
Literally everything else
Staff shortages, contract companies (healthcare), graduate programs and their focus/preparedness for healthcare settings 
Requirement of CCC
Advocacy from ASHA.  Esp for Med SLPs  we need programs to offer SLPDs to be able to sit at the table with our colleagues 
Lack of diversity, lack of appreciation/respect for clinicians who come from diverse backgrounds, bilingual clinicians expected to do double the work with no additional pay, this field is extremely classist and lacks diversity and cultural responsiveness
Wage disparity; inconsistent messaging from ASHA, limited benefit from being a member of ASHA; ineffectiveness of ASHA governance to address significant issues on the field, in particular, guidance about the ever increasing needs of students with mental health concerns. Also, the negative perception of ASHA within our profession. Also, the lack of diversity in our field and research is disappointing and continues to be problematic. 
Salaries are too low. Scope of practice is too wide to gain all important and relevant knowledge in graduate school. For example, pediatric feeding and swallowing is not covered in depth and leaves a gap in services once SLPs graduate because of limited experience.
Irrelevance of available research, high cost of CEUs, inadequate education, poor insurance reimbursement, 
There are many areas where I feel the profession is lacking. The first and foremost is in pay. My husband works in insurance and makes more than my salary (as a school-based SLP) SOLELY in his bonuses and raises. That, to me, is demoralizing. We are not valued as a profession. The next biggest issue I have is the unpreparedness. In my graduate training, I was merely taught theories, no practical knowledge for actual treatment techniques. The third biggest problem is access to current research. It is often cost prohibitive. Also, we don't get substitutes and are pressured to make up any sessions we miss, even if engaging in research to further our practice. ASHA expects EBP from its members, but the CEUs ASHA provides are not all EBP. There needs to be some expectation of regulation of this, per ASHA's own Code of Ethics. 
Weak advocacy infrastructure in our field (including and imo predominantly diminished perception of womens roles in society) but that was captured indirectly through several metrics but think is deserved of its own category. 
Despite years of school, everything I do at work I learned on the job. This role is not respected within healthcare settings and daily roles. It is a very stressful job that is not compensated appropriately. No upward mobility for potential promotions. 
Not all work positions afford time or money to support CEUs. I think we should be required to have more CEU hours than we do as well. Our diversity is significantly lacking and is a detriment to our service. 
It's WAY too broad.  I work in the school and we just keep piled upon.  And we make 30K less than OT and PT.  It's awful.  Also, no one in the school knows what I do, nor do they understand my clinical training and I'm sick of being called a speech teacher.
Everything... ASHA has failed to support PhD students to support the research necessary to progress, CAA failed to hold university programs accountable for discriminatory practices, SLPs act as aspiration police in dysphagia care, ASHA has failed to support diversity in the discipline.
Recruitment and retention of students (especially diverse students) in CSD and SLP programs 
ASHA has demonstrated poor ability to follow through on their mission statements, and to make statements and take a stand on issues that matter. They have been tone deaf and wishy-washy at best, and persecutory and concealing at worst. They need to address all of the weaknesses I perceive and name below. We have a lot of work to do to honor and increase diversity in all areas (race, gender, sexuality, ability and other-ability, and more). We need to promote the field as an option for young people thinking about careers, so that we can increase diversity and serve our diverse populations better. We need to advocate for better working environments in medical settings (e.g. pay, productivity, reimbursement). We don't get near the level of respect from referral sources and doctors as PT does. We need to raise awareness about disorders in populations we treat and the people suffering from invisible disabilities. I feel bad that I'm using Bruce Willis and Gabrielle Giffords as examples for progressive neurological diseases and aphasia -- the decreased awareness about aphasia on the part of the general population still seems as low as when I started 10 years ago. We need to make research and academia connected to clinical practice, and have clinicians learn and use more EBP for the good of the patients we treat. I graduated without knowing the difference from a vallecular sinus and a pyriform sinus; I am ashamed and horrified that I was let loose on the population to make poorly informed recommendations that impacted people’s ability to eat and enjoy meals, and achieve hydration and nutrition. I couldn’t imagine a doctor graduating med school and being so uneducated on the basics -- it’s unthinkable, unfathomable. I have transformed my clinical practice since then, but I still think about the uselessness of my clinical skills 10 years ago and the lives (and quality of lives) I must have impacted. I would support separate tracks for peds/education-based and adult/medical-based training for med SLP in undergrad and grad school - there is so much to learn and we owe it to the populations we treat and professionals we collaborate with.
some recent changes to ASHA's code of conduct, specifically removing statements preventing discrimination, was very disturbing to me and many of my colleagues
Clinicians are limited by insurance restrictions on reimbursement, high caseloads, and high productivity requirements, all of which diminish their clinical effectiveness and client outcomes.
Need more multilingual SLPs, need more support/access for underserved communities. Our compensation should be increasing at the same rate as other allied health professions/therapies
competitive nature of graduate programs gatekeeping against students from lower SES backgrounds, high cost of graduate programs/low return on investment financially, burnout, unethical productivity, lack of union
There is a clear lack of diversity in this field and being a minority, it feels lonely and micro aggressions and implicit bias can definitely be felt in the workplace 
Access to better CEU trainings for therapist over 7 years of experience is limited 
I feel as if the aforementioned characteristics (i.e., high flexibility) is often used against professionals in the field, resulting in burn out. There are not many established support systems created for providers. Additionally, the treatment of graduate students in program (emotionally, mentally, etc) is deplorable.  
Not supporting or even shaming other SLPs at time, unwillingness to be open minded to new information
I find that there is not enough knowledge or openness from US SLPs to look at what is going on in the field beyond the US. I suppose that fits into a collegial perspective from a larger lens
So white, low pay, high stress, no visibility or respect for us, work load is out of control with no promotions in sight. 
Insurance reimbursements for private practice, the title "Pathologist" 

Recruitment/retention of new SLPs, and ADVOCACY for current SLPs, to redistribute the overwhelming and unrealistic caseload numbers in the school settings.
Our scope is so wide the MS degree isn't sufficient. SLP needs to move towards a doctorate like other rehab professionals. Or update the standards. We are one of the few fields that has such a large scope and the ability to treat across the lifespan. AAC and counseling should be required courses in grad school. These are currently electives. Aphasia should be it's own separate course because of increasing strokes due to the aging US population. SLPs need more anatomy training when working in healthcare settings. There shouldn't be medical vs school-based SLPs/graduate programs. Every SLP should feel competent to work in any setting, but especially with swallowing, SLPs don't feel comfortable due to their lack of training. We cannot claim to be the experts in swallowing/feeding if we don't have sufficient training, including FEES/VFSS in graduate school. The CF should be abolished; this is why SLPs lack respect . The total clinical hours SLPs aquire in the CFY and graduate school equate to OT/PT hours. Those hours should be acquired in graduate school and then after passing the praxis, SLPs should have full licensure. The CF is holding back the field because employers take advantage of vulnerable CFs. CFs are underpaid and overworked and often don't have benefits if they work for an agency or small private practice. The CF is also so restrictive, because it must be 9 months for 36 weeks. Working overtime doesn't expedite the CF process. At the very least hours earned im excess from graduate school should count towards the CF and the CF shouldn't be 9 months, it should be completed as long as the required hours are earned. ASHA should establish standards for the bachelors degree to have standards for SLPAs. Clinical hours should be part of undergraduate training, (similar to nursing). Undergraduate hours should/could be applied to graduate/CF hours. Finally, ASHA needs to address the racism in the field. Bilingual/multicultural education should be required as part of graduate training. This is what will increase diversity in the field. We need more men, POC, and bilingual providers in the US. DEI statements aren't enough. 
Mental health and the impact on ourselves and our people/children served
Weak support for SLPs developing self-advocacy, understanding systemic challenges, and feeling empowered to make creative change
Not enough graduate programs, outdated curriculum, minimal swallowing research 
the disparity in skills between SLPs
n

Wage gap, stress level, reduced access to research 
It’s contradictory to work hard to be a generalist in grad school and promptly turn around and have to narrow a field of expertise for a single position. In my opinion the flexibility of having all 9 topics included in grad school is not worth the trade off of the on the job learning that has to take place as a result of dabbling in all 9 areas in grad school. To me it seems that this can happen at the expense of people we serve. If we could begin clinicals in undergrad or prerequisite courses, we’d be better equipped to narrow a track in grad school and be better prepared to serve clients/patients straight into a CFY. Especially considering the great variability in quality of CFY supervision that is possible within current ASHA standards, I believe it would be more ethical to prepare students and young professionals this way. It’s too easy to be overwhelmed with burnout after hearing we’re equipped to deal with and any all communication issue across the lifespan, and then encountering immense variety just within a single population. I’m calling the emperor naked. Jack of all trades is a master of none! 
Salary for education received
A moderate or significant perceived weakness in our field is our mentality to “fix” rather than critically think, take offense rather than welcome a challenge and have thought provoking discussion, and complacency at the cost of patient care and field advancement in our respective settings
DEI practices 
N.A. 
Salary is not fair for education level
Pay, opportunity for raises/growth, exposure to research

Inferiority in the educational setting when it comes to pay scale in comparison to occupational therapists, physical therapists, yet SLP’s possess significant case management responsibilities.
SLPs being "gate-keepy" with information when meeting new/younger SLPs
Salary/compensation 
Low pay with high productivity standards. No one talks about high turn over in settings as a result of this. Cost of ASHA dues is another one.
Low pay, lack of positions with work/life balance and flexibility due to high caseload demands, requirement to be as ASHA member - the annual cost is high with zero benefit 
Contract companies hiring SLPs which then cannot be hired by an employer directly, and anytime I search for a job contract companies are always the first ones that come up.
Asha does nothing but take our money and provide no support in providing members with affordable education and little to no advocacy for livable wages for its members. If I weren’t married I couldn’t survive on my wages alone in this economy with 2 children. They gatekeep education and knowledge as well. I pay 250 dollars for a magazine 
We are devisive, especially online and tend to be overworked
Lack of progress with increased education to support medical speech pathology. Salary is poor and contiued to be less than PT snd OT 
I feel we pay way too much yearly in ASHA dues for minimal representation and assistance back to me/us. It’s twice as much as my other therapy colleagues. I don’t feel our profession is supported and promoted to our jobs. My OT colleagues get better support than I do. 
Lack of advocacy in general to keep up with the times. We have always had to have a Masters. Now all of a sudden PT and OT have to have clinical doctorates which is probably no more education than what we have, and it make us look 'less than'.
Caseload Vs workload, burnout, super low insurance reim 
School SLP’s caseloads are ridiculous 
A significant lack of understanding amongst SLPs on what part of the ASHA dues are necessary to maintain certification.
Scope of practice, school based SLP jobs are impossible to manage with caseload sizes, group therapy, and meetings. There is no way every school SLP is doing right ethically with their caseload and no time for caseload management. Pay is really low for the amount of hours we work in both school and clinic settings. 
ASHA takes so much money and offers nothing in return.
Weaknesses include low pay for skilled intervention,  particularly among hospitals

Work load not discussed enough impacting quality of services 

The sad excuse of a governing org that is ASHA, exorbitant cost of entry into the field, disgusting tests like the CELF-5, lack of a single place to access ebp screeners/evals for IP, lack of depth of knowledge about the big 9 (e.g., aac in icu, not just pecs for Aut)
Its a good thing that grad programs cover the 9 areas but we dont get enough time or a deep dive in any of them. I did not feel prepared for working in the field;  caseload size and worklife balance is a huge issue; teachers have curriculums to guide them, SLPs don't. This significantly adds to the mental load. 
Representation from our “governing board”. I feel that there has been a rise of MLM groups which is tempting for the “greener” SLP’s, trying to figure things out. The fact that US based SLP’s have to pay ASHA for employment in many places is manipulation and abuse (of power). Being a member of ASHA does not make me a better clinician. I am the best I can be because of the team of support around me (other SLP’s, SLPA’s, and other professions I collaborate with frequently). The lack of diversity is appalling. The delayed and oftentimes culturally insensitive responses from ASHA to social injustices are disappointing, at best. The pay is ridiculous. And the cost of schooling is OUTRAGEOUS. I am not receiving medical doctor money, why do I have MD level debt? $130,000 in student debt is insane. 
Lack of or reduced access to appropriate and thorough dysphagia training in some grad programs. Poor consistency of training. Poor ability for some clinical instructors to be flexible with people of different backgrounds (student clinicians AND clients)/prescriptivism in the field. (Though I'm 11 years out of grad school, so maybe some of this has changed?) Some SLPs (those training others through online educational groups - I'm looking at you Med SLP Collective - being appalled that an SLP would question a surgeon, and presuming that physicians /surgeons are infallible. We're all people. Instead of actually helping answer a question, they just spew research adjacent to the question that is not helpful in the least.
Lack of FT jobs with benefits, mis classification of W2 as 1099, poor reimbursement from insurance, high caseload in schools
Gap in education regarding normal swallowing physiology, basic knowledge required to be competent in the medical field, ability to evaluate patients as a whole person- all also contribute to the inconsistency of SLP competency + respect for our field. I'm not sure what the solution is, perhaps a pediatric vs. medical education route is part of the answer, but I do appreciate a well-rounded education of communication and swallowing across the lifespan. 
PAY IS AWFUL FOR WHAT WE DO
Low salaries, high workplace stress
Field is far too broad as a result, many become specialized in one area. 
Nobody knows about us. The name of our job title needs to be changed 
The requirement of a clinical fellowship year, unlike our counterparts in PT/OT. As well as the lower pay/limited job opportunities for CFY. 
Gender, race, and cultural homogeneity with those with the most power in the field usually being older whites women with higher SES
poor preparation of master's programs for realities of medical slp work, CFY year is a weakness- lack of consistency of supervision/mentoring for students + taken advantage of by employers, cost of certification and CEUs compared to pay and benefit from organization, CEUs during CFY and first year after CFY do not count so you have so spend even more money, scope of practice being taken over by OTs
Practical learning and research that translates to improved functional outcomes, inconsistency with treatment, focus on impairments vs the person
Caseload/workload, productivity, the educational speech pathology model, and reinbursement
Division amongst therapists in our field- particularly lack of respect for one another and attitudes of superiority, judgment, entitlement, divisiveness are totally tearing the field apart. How can we advocate despite ASHA and outside forces when we are so busy tearing each other down. 


Needing to renew ASHA yearly.  Dues in December.  Still needing to pay to access research after dues.  Cost of CEUS.  Having to hold a ASHA license as well as state license (PT and OT do not).  Needing state licenses to work teletherapy.  State licensing protocols.  Military spouse licensure assistance.
Productivity requirements putting limitations on EBP

Not enough representation of different racial or SES backgrounds, graduate programs are inaccessible to those who need to work to support families or themselves while in school, ableism is rampant
That what I just wrote for expansion and specialization has not been considered seriously even though the advanced training might have significant qualitative and quantitative results for more effective treatment and outcomes
Productivity requirements (SNF), administrators of nursing homes or rehab directors not allowing free water protocol or patient to choose their own diets textures, 
low pay, Medicaid reimbursement rates, high productivity expectations, out of date practices on dysphagia dx and tx, lack of instrumentals in SNFs
No accountability or incentive to keep up with best practices, exponentially declining reimbursement, zero advocacy from an organization that essentially forces us to pay them but won’t even enforce its own rules, huge amount of responsibility with very little respect or regard
Lack of quality education and training. My clinical supervision was a joke. Low pay - in schools? It’s not a livable wage. Insane caseloads. No caps. Money hungry clinics. Reimbursement cuts. 
Significant discrepancy in pay rates in different states and regions, which is not fully explainable by cost of living differences. Also, the lack of upward mobility within our field, and low maximum income, is a huge issue.
We are forced to self advocate in all settings and it's not talked about enough in graduate school or when training to be in the profession 
Lack of caseload caps
Lack of lobbying for reimbursement and hands off approach to improving work conditions and collaborating with states 
Productivity standards. Even with salaried positions… a lot of work done on own time.

asha is useless in advocating for us and i waste my money in dues
Seems like newer slps are more a mile wide and an inch deep. I feel my education was superior.  ( not trying to be a jerk but yeah... alot better)
Insurance companies demonstrate their low regard for our field with their very low reimbursement rates

Grade inflation at the university level is absolutely ridiculous at some institutions. They care more about stats for their pamphlets than making sure students are well trained and knowledgeable. 
High workload leading to significant burnout 
Our scope is too wide, we should have enforced caseload caps in the schools
Sticking to diet and fluid modification without instrumentals; not getting to grips with tech in healthcare like biofeedback, FEES/Vfs, rehab options - these being seen as fancy add ons not essential!
CFY requirement, cost of education (limits accessibility to entering the field)
Pay is too low. Caseloads are too high. The job is extremely stressful and energy/time-consuming. 
Undervalued, overworked, underpaid
Going “up the ladder” is a lie told to us to get us into graduate school. Unchecked caseload sizes, apathy towards our knowledge from other professionals. It is important to note that the phrasing of your statements as well as the choices given are limiting. Sure ASHA says XYZ and that in theory is nice, but I do not feel like many aspects listed are being seen by them as a whole. Like with SES. Maybe we’re mostly white because of the financial barrier to pay for an undergraduate degree and a masters degree for marginalized groups. 
We are not supported by our board.
The limited abilities to specialize in our training. Especially at the graduate school level.

The amout of work in the schools plus shotages
Encroachment, crowd sourcing expertise/mentors via social media (neither party has any idea of what’s the true clinical situation (negligent and potentially dangerous), poor transparency and conflict of interest accountability
Limited mobility within field. I went on to get 2 advanced degrees (MPH and PhD) because I felt so stagnant in my clinical role despite seeking opportunities for growth/leadership in my setting (acute care).  Now in academia I have these opportunities, but I found it very challenging to create these in my clinical role and I suspect others face similar challenges. 
Workload and burnout rates 
Speech-Language Pathology is often an overlooked, misunderstood, and undervalued profession.  
Many students coming out of masters programs are not ready for clinical work. There are more and more programs yet their training and education seem to be getting worse. Could this be related to the pandemic or just who they are accepting into programs? Undergrad GPAs, writing ability, and critical thinking ability appear to be less important than getting the tuition dollars into programs. 
No representation from ASHA to issue hard caseload caps or salary increases
Salary and workload 
We are very underpaid and very undervalued
Overwhelm of high caseloads

Overworked, underpaid, little upward job trajectory 
Lower pay, higher membership fees with little to no benefits, not enough training in certain areas
The amount of support I get as an SLP both from my peers and ASHA is laughable. I’ve considered stopping my affiliation as a result as I don’t see the financial benefit to give them my dues when I don’t see any benefit. Additionally, I would like to see supervising a CF-SLP count as continuing education as it does for our OT and PT peers. 
Caseload size, salary, lack of support from Asha 
homogenous population, not easy to do if you are different in ANY WAY. Also i'm not convinced SLPs get much done at all, evidence wise 
Great flexibility if you have family income that allows part time work, terrible options for people who need full time + benefits, zero upward mobility in most cases,  no extrinsic incentives and rewards for great performance 

Stress level
Ableism is a huge problem, especially in the area of ASHA's requirements for education prior to entering the field. We would benefit from more disabled clinicians because they will understand the clients best
Number of programs available, affordability of undergraduate and graduate programs
1. Broad scope of field 2. Poor quality ASHA-sponsored CEUs 3. ASHA-PAC donating to political candidates who support racist/harmful policies which negatively impact our students, clients, and ourselves (as a profession dominated by women) 3. Lack of research clarity and professional guidance around hot-button issues (orofacial myology, rapid prompting, ABA, ableism to name a few) 4. Pay-to-play certifications for programs that are highly sought after by clients due to savvy advertising yet limited research base (PROMPT, orofacial myology, various medically-based certifications)
ASHA dues vs do’s (a lot of money vs. very little benefits of being a member; also their politicalized ties (ew)). Caseload vs Workload and the differences for both with each state
Bit enough research in EBP relating to adult disorders

The financial compensation that we receive for the amount of education and training we receive is a serious weakness. 
Compensation 
I don’t think there is upward mobility unless you transition into administration . Pay does not match schooling. ASHA doesn’t advocate and allows BS certifications like TR’s to exist. Career is not accessible to many POC. Too many wealthy whites women treating majority POC who cannot relate to their experiences and are not qualified to work in those populations. CEUs are too expensive. 
Caseload management. Burn out. People leaving field.  Our ccc get us nothing.  I skipped most the asha questions bc I don’t follow asha- I pay my dues and that’s it.  School system employees significantly under paid. Grad programs are too small and “rigorous” leading to shortage of SLPs. People drop program bc they hear how cut throat it is and hard to get into grad school it is.  
The school system/IEP laws are not conducive for providing appropriate therapy for a variety of reasons
Insurance reimbursement for our services, affordability of CEUs, regulated specialization programs. 
Cost of living vs. salary bands; difficulty hiring & retaining talent - significant turnover and unfilled positions; limited business/managerial skills amongst private practice owners leading to toxic culture; unrealistic expectations from parents/schools/insurance companies
Inability to specialize.
Enormous caseloads, little to no support, cost of degree does not match income, mismatched promises about job setting opportunities post-graduation (most jobs are school or SNF), lack of support from ASHA
We have no standards if practice for dysphagia and it is truly a toss up whether a patient is treated competently or by someone who is practicing in the dark ages. 
Diversity, compensation
Diversity, caseload management 
Lack of competency across multiple areas in the scope of practice
Very low salaries, little opportunity for upward mobility 
No many people know what all we do 
There are too many areas where we are expected to show mastery; high stress levels
Extremely inconsistent salary ranges, no nation wide caseload caps, LACK OF DIVERSITY
Shady practices in private practice
Compensation for school based positions, too many things to be responsible for.
Lack of support from ASHA; performative actions by ASHA towards anti-racism, they talk about it but don’t follow through; lack of support for BIPOCs; the range of clinical practices (older SLPs may not be in touch with current research, such as neurodiversity affirming practices but no support from ASHA to close this gap
It is difficult to access research
In terms of collective bargaining agreements for school based SLPs: they are tailored for teachers and not SLPs- as a result we don’t benefit the same as teachers 
Our pay is so unfair. We work so hard and often face pay cuts, no bonuses, no raises, and no paid holidays unless you are maybe in the schools
Limited diversity; lack of support from governing bodies; low compensation/pay; limited accessibility to research; high dues without adequate support from those requiring dues
Companies/corporations that pressure SLPs to provide services in a manner to satisfy the company’s financial bottom line; particularly pervasive in SNF settings. Companies offering low ball wages/salaries and poor benefits, particularly to SLPs starting out in the field and those SLPs who accept those offers out of fear of not finding a job. SLPs who continue to practice without updating skills based on EBP which not only is a disservice to our clients, but exacerbates lack of respect for SLP in the medical community (my observations and opinions in my 25 years of practice). 

Ha, where to begin? ASHA’s financial requirements for how little they return, to start. Also the structure of graduate programs. How much information we are required to learn within 2 years is becoming a greater burden. 
Paperwork and reimbursement levels through insurance are terrible. I specialize in AAC, and I spend way too much time educating others in my field. 
Lack of consistency across SLPs in regards to assessments, practices, and outcome measures. Lack of assessments and tools required by contract companies in the SNFs. Unrealistic productivity standards in by these companies. Lack of ASHA standing up to protect SLPs from money hungry companies who only seek to bill Medicare and are not patient-centered. Resistance by facilities to obtain instrumental exams on patients. The list goes on. 

Practical research for medical slp.
The CFY experience for me due to Covid and the nature of SNF setting was a complete joke.  CFY in a medical setting other than a SNF is difficult. 
Opinions that are diverse are not being accepted. Everyone does not have to see the same for the field to work effectively. And the loudest complainers are not even on state association boards. Achieve things locally and statewide yourself through grassroots efforts before you go making demands from the national body.
expectations to work outside of contract hours, high number of job duties/expectations outside of direct service 
Low pay, no caseload caps, no advocacy for our rights from asha 
Other healthcare professionals understanding our scope of practice, the level of medical SLP training in colleges, the availability of SLP services in rural areas


Amount of debt SLPs are in when they enter the field, lack of oversight and advocacy on the part of ASHA (i.e., not making caseload caps legally binding, not lobbying for increased pay), cost of ASHA
Very difficult to find medical CFY. Not enough specific training for different job roles (school vs health care vs private practice, etc.). Not enough salary transparency and too much salary discrepancy. Too much out of pocket money to maintain certifications and CEUs in comparison to salary. 
Caseload numbers in the schools. Paperwork in the schools.
No
Professors who never or rarely practice as clinicians, exploitative and predatory business practices of some SLPs who develop a "cult of personality" around them, poorly funded research, difficulty in finding advanced CEUs, poor visibility of our field, poor income combined with healthcare employers who don't pay for licenses or continuing education, no clear mentoring opportunities for many areas of specialization 

Graduate schools preparing clinicians for real-world skills to be able to work in the field
The lack of understanding of the field by the general public. Workload in the educational setting as well as pay. In my state especially, I don’t feel the median salary for those in education is representative.
Advocacy for pay, workloads, boundaries, and other working conditions
From the perspective of an education based SLP, we are often restricted significantly by being absorbed into the contracts and payscales of teachers and not treated as specialists with critically different needs as far as caseload and workload balance and compensation.
Caseload sizes in the school are too big, states do not follow caseload caps, we have to pay for current research even though we pay 200 dollars for asha dues every year, we need pur own pay scale in education and should not be on tje teacher pay scale because we are not teachers! 
CFs are hepless to their situation and are often abused/taken advantage of, salaries are extremely low for our expertise and skill, SLPs are required to take home hours and hours worth of paperwork unpaid
Too much to do, too much to learn, too much to pay, too many responsibilities between state/asha licenses, conflicting demands of school district,parents, employers, asha, etc
Lack of consistency and support on caseloads and burn-out
I feel that when I take my time and do thorough documentation, my productivity percentage lowers significantly. To meet my 85-90% productivity standards, I feel that I must rush and half ass my work at times. The SNF setting leads good clinicians to do unethical things. Im only in my CF but I recognize that SNFs are heavy on the money making aspect. I went into this profession to help patients, not get more money for admin. 
I left the field after completing my CF because I realized I could use my skills, make the same or greater impact, and take better care of myself (pay, health, etc.) in other fields. The weaknesses of the SLP field outweigh the strengths and made it not worth pursuing to me, despite loving working with my patients.  
poor mentorship/sponsorship programming, poor training/awareness of leadership/management opportunities, poor network/resources in alternative career paths other than clinical care, limited training in business/private practice skills, lack of ability to specialize (e.g. AAC/voice) in graduate training leading to PD money being spent on bad courses.
unregulated caseloads/workloads in most places, or regulated ones that are too high for proper service. School based SLPs being paid on the same salary schedule as teachers in many areas. 
Not enough support for the SLPs in the field. We are under valued and under served.  SLPs should be billing like PT and OT to say that our time is valuable.  It was a disservice to bill 1 unit per service.  
Lack of advocacy and support from ASHA. Little to no actual reward/benefit to paying annual ASHA dues. 


Same cultural differences sometimes limits us to do clinically evidence based practices because the recent advances are done in other languages and other populations so though we learn the techniques, replicating the method in our native language seems impossible sometimes. And we wait till the research gets validated in our languages. Or end up doing functionally appropriate alterations from the evidences available. 
More specifically, the undergrad education needed to even get into the grad program. We need MORE science, particularly in physiology and kinesiology to include THE WHOLE BODY, not just from the neck up!!! This idea that our heads/necks/throats/nervous system work independently on the rest of our bodies and how our ENTIRE body functions impact speech, swallowing, GI, etc, is ignorant and hurts every single professional in our field. It hurts in our abilities to work with OT and PT intelligently, as well as with other medical professionals 
The lack of disabled SLPs in the field— due to ableism and barriers in college/ graduate school and in the field
Employment in our field has been increasingly overtaken by rehab companies and contract companies that typically do not pay the SLPs fair wages or adequate benefits. These greedy companies are making significant money off the SLPs by demanding high productivity rates while providing horrible benefits. The majority of teletherapy companies are paying the SLPs on a 1099.  These educational teletherapy companies are insistent on the SLPs scheduling group sessions resulting in SLPs having high caseloads but often are only paid for four or five hours of work per day.  The educational contract companies often do not pay comparable wages or benefits that the school districts they are contracted with provide to their teachers.  I am sad for the direction this field is headed.  Productivity rates and 1099 pay has both escalated in the last 10-15 years.  There are quality school districts and medical providers that continue to pay well and treat employees professionally but many SLPs do not have access to employment with these companies. I do not know what the answer is but I do know that in my geographic area, there are not enough job choices for SLPs resulting in many SLPs taking teletherapy jobs out of necessity.   
Gatekeeping of information/trainings; certifications that are not from accredited programs yet cost exorbitant amounts of money; poor communication between clinicians at different facilities 
'- education of dysphagia in grad school
Pay in the school setting, cost of maintaining state and national certification for little benefit in return, and no limit on caseloads/workloads is driving SLPs out of the field in waves. Some support for school SLPs working themselves to the bone would be much appreciated.
Ableism, “saviorism,” lack of representation/support for disabled and ND SLPs, not enough advocacy/pushback on absurd productivity requirements and caseload sizes, general PR problems.
I feel like ASHA does not do enough for us as a whole. I know that having CCC's is important, but ASHA doesnt seem to do much for us with the fees SLPs pay. I also feel as though SLPs as a whole are seriously underpaid. Our scope is so large and we are expected to do so much regardless of our setting and get paid very little for the education we hold, the cost of our education, and the work that we do. I wish there was also less complacency in our field regarding pay because for many married SLP's their partner is the one making the signifcant portion of their income, whereas us single-income SLPs are struggling. Lastly, I wish we actually got the respect we deserve. I'm not sure how it is in other settings, but I've seen multiple occasions so far (in these 5 months as a CF) where others have felt they have more knowledge on how to treat students with communication disorders than we do, even though they don't.
No
DEI, gender confusion requirements for ceu’s, woke leadership, weak leadership on social issues 
Workload in schools compared to other related services, with less pay
High stress, extremely broad scope of practice, not a great deal of SLPs supporting each other online 

Quality of medical training at the graduate level, ongoing mentorship/collaboration even as a seasoned practitioner, lack of diversity, poor pay.
Growing sense of “ineffectiveness”, especially with conflict between old school methods and new school methods (old school SLPs may feel stuck, limited, or judged, while new school lack trust or worry that the field will be viewed poorly or worse outcomes for patients)
Currently working in the school setting I have 18 assessments that need to be completed. Post pandemic services have been challenging and I don't feel we are being sufficiently compensated salary wise.
Lack of understanding of what we do and who we help would be the biggest obstacle in healthcare. It impacts salary, funding (insurance/equipment/etc), productivity, and respect. 
Pay, people understanding our role, advocacy
Quality of education between grad programs especially around appropriate assessment seems to vary widely 
Weaknesses: School-Based workloads are high, field is very broad with information and can sometimes be very overwhelming, School administrators have little knowledge on our role in the education system, pay is much lower than ASHA median salary “69,000”, working environment/office space is much smaller and inappropriate for therapy services, billing requirements significantly increase workload, some SLPs are required to take on other duties during work time not associated with professions (e.g., bus duty, lunch duty, etc.), retirement benefits for newer SLPs in school setting are no longer DESE certified since Aug 2019 and difference in retirement from being certified DESE to no longer is significant. 
SLPs are too divided and known in all settings I’ve worked in as “being difficult”. We are significantly underpaid and unrecognized compared to PT/OT. 
Certification in ALL areas of speech and hearing; I have been in pediatrics and education for so long that there is no way I could handle a medical or geriatric setting, yet I was recently recruited for and offered a hospital based position due to lack of SLPs
ASHA. The organization is expensive, ineffective, and biased on the gender debate in our country. The new identity policies and ethics credits are inappropriate and unhelpful. Further, there is limited research to support gender practice in voice and for thise in transition. My license is constantly challenged because of new mandates without sufficient evidence in how to treat this demographic. Im angry and unrepresented by my agency.
Curriculum programs for language disorders in schools that pairs with academic expectations for each grade level. 
Lack of free shared access to necessary information in order to effectively and ethically treat our patients. Poor funding through insurance and facilities to obtain the necessary testing, materials, etc needed to treat our patients. Horrible productivity standards leading to write ups from employers.


The fact that many skilled nursing facilities discourage or refuse to allow instrumental swallow studies ( due to supposed financial constraints)to assist with determining safety and efficiency of the swallow and to provide invaluable insight into the physiological deficits in order to develop the best plan of care/therapy plan for patients is unconscionable and must change.  Allowing contract companies to harass therapists regarding “productivity” is incredibly detrimental to the profession.  I love nursing home patients but I will never work as a treating therapist in that setting due to this abusive behavior
Economic status barring people from being able to complete an unpaid externship 
lack of support and work life balance
A lack of real advocacy in the way of words and action. For example, failing to condemn the Judge Rotenberg Educational Center or never commenting on issues that affect over 90% of our practitioners (women’s health) or doing any visible work for our vulnerable patient populations (unhoused children for example)
We have to have so many credits for a master’s (literally double an education masters) so we might as well add a few credits and just call it a doctorate. 
Overall ASHA advocacy on pay, caseload number, and encroachment of other professionals, specifically ABA
There is very little advocacy for salaries commensurate with what we are responsible for as far as clinical expertise and knowledge. 
A lack of caseload cap 
Tremendous lack of diversity, lack of reimbursement from insurance, don’t even get me started on ABA encroaching on our field and traumatizing students while we adopt their same tactics, lack of emphasis on AAC, lack of clinical relevance in research, lack of accessibility of free research (or free to ASHA members), enormous caseload, unmanageable expectations for productivity, too many people who just get CEUs done rather than focusing on quality, rampant pseudoscience with ASHA’s stamp on it, underpaid 
Limited access to ethical medical health SLP opportunities (appropriate productivity, access to supplies, access to imaging, bare essentials) 
I am completely disgusted by the direction our field is heading and the lack of evidence based practice I see related to dysphagia management. I would not choose to go into this field again. 


I don’t make enough money to justify how much student loan debt it took to get me here.
Lack of upward mobility, stagnation
Neuroaffirmative treatment w research supports, 
Underlying ableism in many of our approaches, participating in a crumbling and inequitable special education system feel like major weaknesses in our field. 
ASHA demonstrates big weaknesses in not providing financially accessible methods for members to maintain certification (I.e. high fees, expensive CEUs). They also demonstrate a big weakness in advocating for improved salaries and compensation.
The perceived value in our services to insurance companies is a significant weakness 
No advocacy from ASHA for state Medicaid rates! Or any reimbursement rates, really. 

low pay compared to cost of living, low pay compared to amount of education
Lack of support in educational setting
Workload vs caseload particularly in the school settting, lack of billing for indirect services 
Homogenous group of (mostly) women from privileged backgrounds isn't helpful to a huge swath of our caseload.


We often work alone or in a very small team. The limited knowledge of our profession. 
Bachelor degree students should be able to work as SLPAs (significant weakness), Short staffed in the school settings (significant weakness), extremely competitive to get into grad school (moderate weakness), no school caseload caps, in the medical setting team members are not often clear on what’s SLPs do (moderate weakness).   
Complicity in cultural erasure, ableism, and linguistic oppression.
Low pay 
Our clinicians desperately need more training at the student level for dealing with behavior and developmental differences 
 Lack of salary advancement, Needing to be a generalist so I cannot get good at anything 
The biggest weakness I experience is the lack of support in helping school-based administrators understand the difference between caseload and workload. Without understanding, there is no help or support before burnout occurs and amazing SLPs walk away from the profession. 
As a group, most know little to nothing about salary negotiation, marketing or business building. Many SLPs accept insulting wages out of desperation. ASHA has not advocated for caseload caps or salary guidelines, nor have they supported SLPs by effectively educating the public on the value of our services, the wide range of our scope of practice or how to effectively access services. Our profession is in a very dangerous situation, with burnout, poor salaries, unreasonable caseloads, encroachment on our scope by ABA/IBI therapists and no effective protection from this encroachment from our professional association. The requirements to practice are high, yet no other aspects of the field seem to reflect this. As well, ASHA has chosen to move forward with a political agenda that does not reflect the whole of their membership. I have just this year, dropped my CCC designation, as well as my membership because of the political stance that I feel is inappropriate for a professional association to be taking. 

Salary
Awareness of our scope and advocacy for what we do! This profession is wildly misunderstood and we feel almost no support from our governing body. We are paid significantly less than other medical professions. We need support from ASHA. 
I am continually frustrated by the lack of guidance or even the addressing of caseload realities in the schools.  Even with the workload calculator, caseload maintenance with all of the accompanying aspects of the school workload is not effectively addressed and dealt with.  Caseloads are completely unrealistic.  
In the educational setting, there is no advocacy or understanding of caseload management or threshold. I also feel the interpretation across states for screening within the school setting is a disadvantage. 
So much turnover in our field. Can’t meet the needs for our profession if pay doesn’t increase and stress decrease.
The pay and stress is just awful in this field. As a SLP, we are underpaid and overworked especially in the school setting. That is why there are so many jobs…because people are leaving in drones!!!
So many. As a CF, I have found that the majority of SLPs that have been in the field for longer have an ignorant mindset on keeping up to date on current research. My supervisors POCs often include targeting certain things that are out of date. 
Pay in schools. Lack of acknowledgment of our expertise. 
The pervasiveness of pseudoscience 
Payment for educational SLPs is a significant issue. Our degree and expertise require a Master’s degree, yet we are often included on a teacher pay scale. Our Master’s degree does nothing in the world of education regarding pay and respectability.
A lot of asha reports feel inaccurate
There's not enough of us to accomplish the mission statement...retirees are constantly pulled to cover the gaps. ASHA may need to streamline some educational requirements so more people can start getting into the field and and slowly work their way to full accreditation 
We aren’t compensated for our knowledge and dedication and effort we put in to our field. There is SOOOO mix to know but we don’t have the time to learn it due to crazy high work loads and we don’t have the money to take the PD and and ASHA already charged us an arm and a leg just to keep our CCCs. We need to change the culture of SLPs on how they feel about our field. It is so negative right now and it’s hard to be around. So many good people leaving the field because we aren’t being taken care of. 
Too many to add. Pay is low. Expectations too high. Demands too high. Not enough of us. We wear too many hats. Those are the major ones 
The compensation in the school setting is terrible.
Salary, 
ASHA’s concern regarding the mental health, burnout rate, and workloads of SLPs. School SLPs in particular carry enormous caseload that are not conducive to positive outcomes for the therapist and clients. SLPs are underpaid and often are in roles with little opportunity for advancement. 
The scope is too large. You can’t be good at 9 different areas. Pick 2-3 areas of expertise after 1 year of grad school and deep dive into them. Also the field needs to be better about actually teaching new grads and teaching grad students not using them as cheap/free labor. Teach me. Be hands on. Grad school doesn’t teach therapy and there aren’t enough therapists that can train. Supervisors should get a salary simply for teaching. We need more hands on quality experience not feeling like a fish out of water every day. 
Marketing of what we actually do in general is not publicly accessible. Support for those who try, but are shut down by ASHA, causes a toxic environment in the SLP community. Education in the SLP setting does not focus enough on the implementation of therapy using EBP, INCLUDING UNDERSTANDING CONSIDERATIONS OF DIFFERENT BACKGROUNDS RACES AND CULTURES, or the realities of the field. 
Inconsistency makes doctors and other professionals disregard us 
Science and research rated as a weakness primarily because I do not see my the research implementation in the form of EBP / being put IN ACTION IN MY COMMUNITY 
The lack of Follow through with supporting recent graduates through the CF process
Compensation and working conditions
Unified state licensing despite ASHA certification, value in reimbursement from Medicare/Medicaid /insurance 
In the schools, specifically in Ohio, we are expected to have caseloads no larger than 80.  I feel like our district interprets this as a caseload of 80 is acceptable. At that number it is impossible to provide good therapy and complete the mounds of paperwork required for each student within the confines of an 8 hour day. We are set up to feel like failures, as there is never enough time to provide good quality intervention for kids unless you are willing to work for a couple hours daily outside of your contract time.   
Awareness and respect about our profession. State and national policies for insurance coverage for speech services (I.e. PT/OT determine discharge location regardless of SLP needs for cognition/speech/swallowing)
mission creep - admin wherever it is higher ed, P-12, EI take advantage of our love and commitment
low pay, poor advocacy from ASHA, lots of scam and unscrupulous business practices in private clinics, universities have an implicit bias with their hiring of professors (white women) as well as admittance of the students (white women) which leads to racist and harmful practices towards students of other races and genders. 
Our Scope of Practice is too large. We need to go back to the basics of our professions. 
Re Collegiality I'm not certain to what extent this exists across the field.  Also the field needs to do far better in advocating for reimbursement of our services.  In a college where we are with other health professionals we have fallen by the wayside.  Some of this may be population specific (e.g., funding for autism vs other more common developmental disorders)
The scope of practice is huge, especially to educate in two years. SLPs need some training in standing up and fighting for their personal rights and work/life balance, as well as for the profession (e.g., with legislatures or school boards). 
Workload (particularly in the California public schools) is incredibly high.  High caseloads with children who have more severe needs is becoming the norm.  Early intervention regional centers for the birth-3 population are also overwhelmed by demand for services.  
The division and false dichotomy between SLPs' treatment of oral language and educator roles for written language and reading is a tremendous weakness that contributes to the low literacy rates in our students. The inability of faculty to appropriately teach students to deliver appropriate services to culturally and linguistically diverse populations is a tremendous weakness in our field. Students of color are already the majority in our public schools, and graduate training needs to put diversity at the forefront.
ASHA does not allow for sufficient flexibility for growth of the profession, it is by far a conservative organization that looks out for its own interests above those of its constituents.
The public has a very limited understanding of the full scope of SLP
High client loads regardless of work setting 
The expense of the education, the challange of covering the big 9 in less than 2 years of graduate school while also completing 400 clinical hours has students conflicted to emphasize grades or clinical competence. SLP profression should be a PhD like PT and OT trainings have evolved to.
Reports say there is mobility, but we aren't given consideration for roles outside of therapy. There is more opportunity to diversify business work in other fields. SLPs aren't given the opportunity to lead teams, just SLP teams.
There are still significant inconsistencies in masters level training
undergraduate education leading to stronger competencies for graduate school; need to consider a clinical doctorate to be in alignment with our peers in PT and OT. Our field is not well understood. Reimbursement rates and autonomy are poor.
Redundant paperwork due to reimbursement entities, taking away from treatment time
Caseload management doesn't seem ideal; What is the future and vision with SLP.D's; lack of PhDs
generalist skills rather than indepth expertise
General respect for our field; lack of doctorate (not parallel to aud, PT, OT)
We are not viewed like similar professionals such as OT in the schools. In addition where I am many school-based jobs are through agencies that may not offer a low salary or no benefits, and per diem positions which offer no financial stability and incentive scheduling maximal number of sessions. There is high therapist turn over which is bad for the students and SLPs. Many schools end up not having school-based services.
ASHA provides nothing of value to me as an SLP. I’m basically forced to pay them money each year with absolutely no added benefit for me. Additionally, there is no advocacy for school-based SLPs. We can’t do it all, and we need better caseload caps.
Extremely limited room for growth, salary does not increase with years of experience 
For educational setting…we present ourself as “experts, therapists, specialists”not team players and part of educational teams
Feelings of inferiority 

Lack of universal accessible systematic protocols for tx & dx 
Not much focus on critical thinking in grad programs, reliance on structured/worksheet cognitive activities vs functional therapy tasks, gaps in knowledge on grad school programs relating to real actual billing and insurance information when working in medical settings, other medical professionals not clear on our job function 
Yearly fees from ASHA with little to no direct benefit for the professional
Racism, sexism, human giver syndrome
Medical positions are largely hourly positions without guarantees so pay is inconsistent unless you work multiple facilities. This also leads me to question if salary reporting rates are accurate-- yes someone may be full time at X amount but how often are they actually getting 40 hours to reach a salary like what's listed on ASHA or Google? Especially in SNF settings.
not enough regulation of caseload sizes, not enough consistency in pay across settings, starting pay is too low across settings, not enough understanding of the field in the public and within our professional settings
having to operate within for-profit healthcare systems (at least in the US) and the compromises made due to this 
Educating other professionals and patients about what SLP’s assess and treat and having respect from other professionals
workload for school-based SLPs, academic teachers and researchers: significant weakness
lack of understand of science v pseudoscience in the field
We have had horrible lobbying in terms of getting paid fairly in comparison to our PT/OT counterparts. 
It’s insulting the excessive salaries of leaders in ASHA.  Significant lack of advocacy & real support for equal respect, salary, working conditions for SLPs in educational setting. Finally, lack of ASHA in listening to its members about the cost of dues when compared to other comparable disciplines (OT, PT).
Salary and appropriate pay. ASHAs advocacy for us

We don’t receive the recognition and financial support we deserve
Salary and pay 

Under payment, lack of support from the state in terms of staff required
Pay rate as SLPA, not getting reimbursed for drive time when patients cancel. Self-Contracted no benefits or taxes being taken out.
Too many to write 
I wasn’t completely comfortable with the way questions were worded; didn’t get at crux of problem… example: school SLP wages in my area are below the stated median.  That’s a big problem which makes it difficult to support a family.  Fair evaluation of school slps by trained observers ( rather than admin with teacher frame of reference) is also an issue.
Income for education based SLPs
If I am not at work, someone suffers.
Pay does not compensate for the level of schooling, continuing Ed and level of expertise we must have. The field is so very vast, it is difficult if not impossible to be an expert in all areas. 
Pay and pay scales not being equal to PTs and psychologists. In PA needing a teaching degree as well a speech license 
The stress and caseload pressures in preschool through 12 education are overwhelming. Graduate schools need more spots or we need more programs. We are missing so many people as slps who would likely be awesome assets to our profession because spots in programs are so limited.
NOT MANDATING CF SUPERVISORS
Caseload numbers, burnout, price of licenses
Paperwork - amount and limited time to complete; Lack of knowledge in the area of Language (school setting). SLPs seem to be working on phonemic awareness vs. language; Lack of professional development in the schools (SLPs are required to attend MANY seminars that do not apply to their practice. 
Low pay in yhe education field, considering the heavy laod of our responsibilities- diagnostics, report writing, medicaid billing, being a casemanager,  writing IEPs, treating, conducting RTI, scheduling, etc. Etc!
The low teacher salary pay for a field that requires a Master's Degree. School Psychologists are receiving pay from the administrative salary schedule, and we are not with the same or more educational scope of practice.  

No
ASHA and canceling state convention in TX

At CAA accredited universities, Assistant Professors must have a doctorate. The average salary is 70K. We need more PhDs to train more master's level SLPs, but there is no incentive. A PhD is costly in both time and money. What is the incentive to go there, if you can make more money in other sectors??!
A lack of funding for actually being able to provide services to those who require them
Salary discrepancies, lack of potential for career growth, burnout
Over referred, understaffed, underpaid, insurance companies 
Weakness: ethics in new graduates 
The pay needs to be higher for the level of education necessary, as well as the bottleneck issue in academia and the dearth of programs.  This questionnaire demonstrates perfectly the near total ignoring of LGBTQ professionals and services to this population, not even having a single question pertaining to this area, and clearly exemplifies how this population is overlooked both towards clinicians and the individuals who are served.
current students appear disinterested in learning from the experience of seasoned therapists, they seem to stop at an EBP search versus focusing on a solutions based approach for their clients, current mode of ASHA seems to encourage divisiness rather than inclusivity and unity in the field, focus seems less on our clients and more on "our own issues" sadly
Lack of respect and from administration and colleagues in K-12
Terrible pay especially in todays economic climate, and such poor access to affordable, strong CEU courses through ASHA. Our annual membership fees get us nothing! Why are we paying??
Encroachment from other fields, low wages, low community knowledge about our field
Trying to work in broken systems (how much change can we make when public education is failing or insurance won’t cover services)
Requiring a master's degree in schools=lack of therapists
Too much duplicate paperwork. It would be nice if we had a clerical person that make calls, set up appointments, make copies, etc. 
Too wide of scope of treatment 
The lack of spaces in graduate programs. I know many people with bachelor’s degrees who could not get into grad school who went into a different field. 
The way SLPs are treated at schools is a weakness. 
Lack of neurodiversity awareness, poor understanding of autistic communication, no training in gestalt language processing, programs that used outdated and ableist compliance therapies
Too many clients for the work hours without payment for the requirement paperwork, billing, lack of preparation time. Expectation as a female heavy field, to be more giving and more time and thought into the patient than for self care and workload balance.
Pay, diversity, inclusiveness, resources 
time to complete documentations compared to treatment/evaluation; ASHA fighting for fair pay in all settings
N/A
ASHA does not advocate for needs.
Over worked, under paid, high stress levels, little support from ASHA 
The yearly cost of CCC is outrageous for the actual benefit given.
Clinical fellowship, broad scope, disproportionate pay, lack of strong leadership in research & advocacy from governing body
Lack of respect as a women dominated field especially in the schools and lack of support from ASHA especially on caseload and paperwork issues
Lack of knowledge of SLPs about other disciplines and vice versa and the need to spend more hours on paperwork and Medicaid billing than on therapy
Low wages (especially when on teacher’s pay scale); lack of mobility between education and medical settings and lack of upward mobility; lack of respect for and/or knowledge of what SLPs do in the schools; large caseloads
I agree that caseloads in the schools are ridiculously high, and that productivity requirements in healthcare settings are also ridiculously high.  
In my years of service, I have seen our caseloads expand, the paperwork and accountability expand to unrealistic expectations.  In many settings, it isn't the salary as much as the feeling that the services that are provided are not reaching the expected goals.  When school cllinicians are asked to complete the amount of paperwork and then serve caseloads of 50 plus, the services are inadequate and frustrating for the clinicians. Asa  group, we area different breed thta cares for the persons we serve and want to see them succeed and will go to extreme measures to see that happen.  Our families should not have to sacrifice so the 'extra' part of the job is completed.

Low pay in educational setting is a significant weakness 
Graduate school programs lack of coverage of school settings; graduate school programs lack of scholarships and grants for tuition

we need to increase salaries- time of education is far too long relative to salary 
Moderate weakness: A lack of understanding the purpose of the SLP profession, even if other parties understand it exists (I.e not just the speech teacher or speech person or it’s just speech) 
A significant weakness is the idea perpetuated by ASHA that an SLP can be equipped to treat a wide arrange of disorders well and with confidence within a school setting. It is difficult to become an expert in a wide range of disorders from fluency, to dyslexia, to articulation, and social deficits. 

Due to the differentiated workload expectations between SLPs and OTs/PTs in education, we do not have the time, energy or ability to fight for better workload or equal playing field as other therapists.  I feel we are crucially missing graduate programs to support more output of qualified candidates for employment.  
Low pay, ridiculous productivity standards, high cost of CEU courses, inability to specialize in areas of practice-we can’t know everything about everything.
I wish we were looked at as equals to OT/PT in the school system.
pay compared to other professionals is embarrassing
Caseloads and stress in the public schools 
Older SLPs not keeping up or willing to change with the time and research 
Salary growth over the course of my career has not kept up with inflation. Starting salaries are not much different than they were in 1994 when I got my first job.  If I were not married with a second income, I would need a second job to pay my bills.
See above.
Caseload caps should be mandated by ASHA as an ethical point
Caseload.  My state has no caps and as an SLP in the schools I have a caseload of over 90 kids.  We also aren't paid anywhere near the national average.  I have 21 years of experience and only make 56k
The expectations and education of the profession in an academic setting.  Not utilized or accessed as it should be despite education of staff.  Our profession is not as "integrated" into the school setting as it should be, yet the percentage of SLP's on teacher pay scale is large.  It's a challenge to advocate for the profession with 1 SLP in district which is also common in smaller districts. 
ASHA does not do enough, IMO, to advocate for higher pay for service providers. We are being taken advantage of, esp remote service providers, since COVID. I don't feel like ASHA has our backs and it's disappointing. 
I don't feel that those of us in the educational system receive the professional growth we need.  We are also not treated as respectfully as other educators and are made to do more than others in education.  We are not provided with substitutes when we are absent are are required to make up sessions when we are absent.  I feel I have been taken advantage of while working in the schools.   
Advocacy and results for school SLP's
It is difficult for an SLP to be effective in all areas that the profession encompasses.
Lack of awareness of the importance of our services = underappreciated, underpaid, underutilized SLPs
ASHA's support of those working in public education- they could set case load caps and influence appropriate working conditions
Improved dissemination of current research as it relates to direct services and evidence based practice 
I am very dissatisfied with our reimbursement rate and salaries in both Audiology and Speech Language Pathology.  Our fields are so diverse and require a great deal of education and continuing education to be proficient.  I have wondered if this is due to ASHA's lack of promoting our field in education and healthcare.  Is it because it is primarily woman that dominate this field that we are underpaid.  As a person who has been in this field since 1979, the low salary issues has remained the same.  My observation is that people do not want to work in the schools anymore (post pandemic) because of the low salary and large caseloads, paperwork, etc. I live in an affluent state, Massachusetts, and SLP hourly rates are anywhere from 45 to 55 dollars an hour.  This is an insult to the amount of years that I have worked in the field.  I know the payrates are even lower in other areas of the country.  Although I really love our field, if I could do it over, I would of become either a neuropsychologist or a physcian for all of the years of school that I attended, including post graduate work.  As you can see, I am on my soapbox, but I truely feel hurt and dissapointed in this aspect of SLP and Audiology.   
Pay
Our scope is too broad to graduate without a more specific track. My medical colleagues found there wasn’t enough medical-centered courses, and pediatric SLPs often find we graduated without learning enough therapy techniques as well. Instead of making it a longer program, it needs to be split into two trajectories. 
The extensive scope of practice that ASHA expects, and licensing of school based SLPs - it's just an additional yearly fee and provides no benefit.
Lack of training in understanding the economics of our profession (how we are paid, entitites/governmental decisions in health care, etc.) and how to advocate at the collegiate level (and beyond) is a weakness.  

I think inadequate pay/compensation and unrealistic productivity standards are the most threatening to our field.
Realistic caseload numbers; pay in schools (b/c most schools you are on a "teacher" salary.  
Productivity expectations in SNFs are not realistic to provide the best care to patients (especially for PRN employees)
Respect for our profession in the school setting is poor/definite weakness. 
Salary in the area of SLP's who work in educational settings.
In my school, I am a department of 1, often forgotten and misunderstood. My speech colleagues throughout the district are supportive, but our opportunities to collaborate in person are minimal. Advocacy in our district is weak, teachers often get higher stipends and more recognition/consideratoin in building based professional development and activities
I don’t not feel that ASHA adequately supports its members. I have paid dues for 23 years and have not received anything in return. 
Access to new research that isn't behind a paywall.
I don't see the need for ASHA.  I keep up with my continuing ed to keep my state license to work in other settings than public schools anyway.  
Weakness - the discrepancy of caseload limits from state to state
That ASHA advocates for crap like gender and diversity inclusion when it can’t even get good pay for its members. ASHA is honestly a waste of money and time.
Caseloads are too high.  Wisconsin isn't bad compared to many other states, but I still find myself working most nights and weekends to keep up.  It is why I will be retiring this year.

Unfortunately, our scope of practice is so vast, that it often leads to unmanageable caseload size. With the lack of awareness for the SLP profession, administration is often not as supportive in this aspect as they are for other professions.
getting into graduate school is difficult and cost prohibitive- several friends are staying SLP-As instead of seeking a Masters due to cost and seeing how their CCC-SLP supervisors are overworked and underappreciated
I continue to feel that those working in a school setting are compared to teachers . Our levl of expertise and training does not compare with that of teachers. In the medical/therapy field we are Master's level, but our programs and training are as rigorous ( or moe rigorous) than others that carry a "Doctorate " in their title. Workloads are incredibly high , pay is low and appreciation is alow. It is sad for our profession.
Salary for school providers is the biggest weakness 
As we are a catch all we need more training on how to identify specifics and that requires us to be paid more
Paperwork, limited understanding of what we do, inconsistent regulations between school and private sector
Already stayed the stress level is high and we are expected to be an expert in so many aspects of our job including AAC. Not enough hours in the day to do all  we need to do at the public school. We are also expected to maintain out caseload cap (55in my district) when we have students with AAC needs.
lack of respect in educational setting, poor pay in educational setting compared to level of education and difficulty of program, high caseloads in education, TERRIBLE state government destroying public education leading to burnout of SLP's
I really don't feel supported by ASHA while working in the schools. I have been to ASHA School conference in the past, and found it very helpful.  However, it is expensive and schools typically do not offer financial support.  I feel like ASHA does not promote the importance of maintaining C's in the schools. I believe this is a need because schools support state licensure so they can claim Medicaid in the Public Schools.  In my 34 years in the profession, administrators rarely value ASHA certification, if they even know what it is.  The final concern I consider to be a significant weakness of our field is the specific undergraduate degree.  I realize that those with Bachelor's degrees compete for all professional degrees. However, Communication disorders is the only degree that must be obtained before graduate training. Those applying for medical, OT, and PT degrees are accepted with any science or STEM Bachelor's. Lawyers can have a variety of undergrad degrees.  I think it's unfair to intentionally insist on so many specific undergraduate classes when there are so few places in graduate work.  I did raise this point with an ASHA representative at a state conference. Her answer was that ASHA can't control the universities. I understand this. But with the need for SLPs continuing to rise and the costs of a Bachelor degree, I believe ASHA needs to be instrumental in helping young people become SLP's. Right now, I feel like we're asking students to take a very expensive gamble.
ASHA has failed our profession as a whole- I do not feel they have advocated for us as a group or have realistic view of the profession
I think the status of school-based SLPs continues to be an area without much significant change. The scope of responibility continues to grow for the school-based SLP without much improvement on workload/caseload changes, compensation, or resources. 
As a full-time educational SLP, the biggest weaknesses in our field are the low pay rates, high and unmanageable caseloads, and lack of appreciation due to unawareness of our specialty. Some of these were listed above, however I wanted to re-iterate, especially because my salary is way below the median $69,000 reported in this survey. We are nationally certified through ASHA, yet we make the same salary as a teacher with a Master's degree. Teachers who are nationally certified receive yearly supplements of around $5,000 and SLPs do not. This is a significant weakness. We need more awareness to advocate our worth. 
Lack of education and training for pediatric feeding disorders in graduate school
workload and caseload size 
Pay, cost of education vs benefit/use once in the filed. I think a paid apprenticeship after a bachelor’s in the area you want to work in “medical, school, adult, pediatric, would be more realistic as the cost of education rarely pays off for pay out of school unless you are lucky enough to get out of the field of SLP. Also we NEED a basic business class as having a private practice is one of the only ways to have a work life balance with decent pay, but we learn absolutely nothing about operating a business and it’s almost impossible to do. This would also more specialized areas. Also offer a grad school level speciality area like physicians do, dermatologist vs cardiologist, could be an option. Productivity should be illegal. Also with a business class, learning about how serviced are paid for should be in undergrad. 
High caseloads and paperwork, limited knowledge of other of what SLPs do, need more research to support our position
There needs to be more of a push towards a national certification that allows people to practice in multiple states or over teletherapy without having to go through the licensing process for each of those states.  Also more cohesion over the debate on myofunctional therapy effectiveness.
If school's want to attract SLPs they must increase the pay. Schools also need to have more realistic caseloads and look at the workload of therapists.
Salary in educational setting, amount of money we pay for licenses (look into requiring reimbursement from employers), promoting our field more both in medical and school settings, caseload caps
Service load size and there being no end in sight; lack of knowledge at school based level of the difference between SLPs versus being a "teacher"/different licensing/different education requirements; continued lack of diversity in our field; continued lack of addressing neurodiversity issues and the way we provide services for those populations; high rate of burnout early in career

Lack of awarness of our job has resulted in being lumped in with teacehrs vs PTs, OTs, etc, in the school setting that has impacted negatively on SLP pay and deliniation of school responsibilies. IE PTs and OTs do not attend staff meeitngs, assist with duty, etc
A weakness is that once a speech pathologist is involved in a specific case the child will be "cured". Parents and other like people have loads of Faith, but we are not paid or treated that professionally by other medical people and principals.
The greatest weaknesses of our field are the abuse of our time and skills and the lack of value placed on what we do. The lack of a caseload cap for school based SLPs by ASHA is an atrocious oversight. ASHA does absolutely NOTHING for us except ask us for money and then more money. They offer little to no CEUs as a part of our membership and have the audacity to charge over $400 for a conference with little to no access for those of us who are actually working in the trenches of the public school systems getting paid barely enough to live comfortably. ASHA should either step up or be abolished. 
See above. Salary, salary, salary AND limiting caseload. We are classified as teachers without student caps.

Low Salary for the level of education and training

It is very difficult in a school setting to meet the needs of students. Our caseloads are too high and children are more and more severe every year. We are expected to see kids in groups which is not beneficial to any of the students in the group. Ideally districts would hire more SLPs in the short term so that students aren't in speech for years on end because they are not getting what they need having to be placed in a group. 
More political influence to make changes at the state/local levels for caseload/workload limits/processes to ensure speech/language services are provided in the best possible way to students and SLPs are not overburdened with unrealistic and inequitable expectations for the practice. 
Undermining colleagues- private practice inappropriately labeling children with communication disability with average scores on testing and the burnout and demoralization in working in a public school setting
SLPs in the school setting NEED a separate salary from teachers. We are NOT teachers. Our degrees are different, our training is different, our therapy model is different. This is a HUGE weakness. There isn't enough direction from ASHA or State representatives. School leaders do not see a need to take SLPs off the teacher pay scale because they are not getting enough direction from the state or national board on this matter. SLPs are trying to advocate for themselves and getting rejected and treated poorly for this reason. 

We are allowing ABA to encroach and dominate speech and language tx in schools and other settings. As a whole, our field is full of ableism, neurotypical privilege, and white, middle class privilege. 
workload in the school is next to impossible
SLPs are overworked and underpaid in all settings. In education, there aren't any other service providers that carry the load that SLPs do, however, we are treated the same. 
need expertise is so many areas and in the schools, the complexity of disorders keeps increasing
Graduate students do not seem prepared in all 9 areas of communication by direct experience.  School based SLP's are have limited time to research and obtain new information.
The caseload in the schools is a significant weakness. Even with the recommended caseload cap of 55 students, that amount is too high for a caseload that consists of preschool students and students in special day classes. Most of my students have 30-minutes of individual services so my workload is much higher than other others with the same amount of students. There needs to be caseload caps from the state and more clear standards for those caps (e.g. 55 student cap if 80% caseload is upper level (MS/HS) gen ed. or 90% lower level (K-5) gen. ed./ 50 student cap if 70% caseload is upper-level gen. ed or  80% K-5 gen. ed./ 45 students cap if 50% caseload is upper level gen. ed. or 70% K-5 gen. ed./ 40 students cap if caseload is 0-30% upper level gen. ed. or 50% k-5 gen. ed./ 35 student cap if caseload is 0-30% k-5 gen. ed. This would mean that if caseload is 80% gen. ed, 20% could be preschool, TK or special day class students (being that these populations add more workload). 
Caseload size in the public schools is enormous.  Paperwork and workload has quintupled in the last 2 decades and little change has been seen with caseload averages. Working in acute care and SNFs has deteriorated to per diem work and unrealistic expectations of 100% productivity.  Where are the legal ramifications for employers who expect unpaid work over hours? with 
I feel as if not enough people "know" or value what an SLP does, we are often "forgotten" in educational and healthcare settings, resulting in lower pay, less available training and less benefits than other professionals.
Low salary for school-based SLPs (same pay scale )
Lack of diversity and low pay rates compared to other graduate professions.
We need funding for PhD programs so it's not so difficult to get into grad school.  We need stronger advocacy at the local, state and federal levels for higher pay and caseload caps.
The respect & salary we deserve in working in Education/Schools, no support, medical insurance improvement & especially if want to retire at age 60 w/ 30 yrs in schools (I think in schools should be age 55 with 25 yrs in for full retirement due to burnout, cops get lower age requirements; certification needs to be national, no work space, we should be able to be in union & be seen as a specialty/clinical service & get paid above the teacher salary; more clarity on CCC & those who don't hold CCC but are working messes up us using CCC to increase salary above teachers when have 1 or 2 ppl hired that do not have them & are younger though; am in state of PA
Wages are dependent on insurance reinbursment, there needs to be a billable code for documentation in the home heath and clinic settings, progress notes specifically take more time that would be possible in a normal session to still give the expected quality of care. There needs to bee more conditions for increased pay related to increases caseloads in the school settings. CDC guidelines are linked on ASHA, however ASHA has done nothing to ensure they're accurate/get updated.  
Our caseloads in the school are not feasible. The demands of the school-based SLP include monitoring students in the MTSS process in addition to our caseloads. It is not an attainable goal and we take pride in being the best at what we do. You cannot do your best when you are constantly working overtime to just hit par.
I don't feel ASHA cares about the population it represents as it has never asked for opinions or suggestions. 
high caseload and workload
School caseloads are far too large in many states.  Caseloads above 45 (they should be much lower for more severely involved students)are unmanagable if the SLP is going to complete all parts of the job adequately and without doing unpaid work.  Stress and burnout are serious issues
The amount of paperwork required in the school setting.
ASHA membership does not provide enough perks -- we should have universal licensure which would make moving and providing services in different states easier
Support for school based SLPs both emotionally and through lobbies for pay raises; the fact that often the average pay for SLPs that is posted in various areas combines all sites, so it is skewed by the higher pay of contract, private practices, medically based, etc.. 
I do not see a lot of advanced/higher paying jobs in our field.  I could make another $10-15K, doing something not in the schools, but then working full time, so not gaining much.  With our education requirements, continued ongoing level of education and our scientific background, we are highly under valued for our level of Dx skills, therapeutic skills and services we provide people for daily living functions.  I also think we need to look at our services as more of an intervtion approach to be completed with fidelity, and not just 1x per week for an hour, we can be providing significanly more services to impact language, reading comprehension, social language especially as social skills are becoming more and more of a problem.
Caseload sizes and workload requirements in the education setting are too high to be effective. 
There is way more of a workload, when comparing to caseload numbers. I spend 25% of my work hours (and outside work hours) writing reports, keeping up with IEPs and re-evaluations and billing in my field, rather than direct time with my clients due to all the paperwork needed to work in the educational setting. It is setting therapists up for failure and burn-out.
Pay
Our awareness of diversity of our clients.
lack of career advancement opportunities (beyond establishing a private practice); salary range for college teaching is comparable to that of a practicing clinician, reducing the incentive to advance to that field 
advocating for the therapists working in schools: caseload size, benefits, salary

Pay for school based SLPs
I can’t think of any
Difficulty getting into good grad programs and attracting good candidates
Availability of quality materials in Spanish is a perceived weakness. Spanish is the 2nd most spoken language in the U.S.
Lack of creadited colleges to earn a Masters degree as an SLP 
ASHA needs to campaign for pay scale balances with other providers e.g. PT, OT pay levels

I don't think the salary questions are accurate. I'm in a school and not making that much. Lack of compensation in the schools is a big weakness. 
Significant pay discrepancy between rehab providers (slp low versus ot/pt much higher salary and pay scale) 
Our profession is highly mistreated in the educational setting. Top administrators, school administrators and teachers try to dictate what we (SLPs) can or can not do. 
Lack of awareness requiring individual SLPs to continually advocate for clients/patients/students in all settings
Paperwork demands are ridiculous. Structural ableism makes it difficult to use strengths-based approaches when we constantly have to justify services in terms of our students' deficits. We're siloed--our co-workers often don't understand what we do or have expectations that don't align with reality. We're usually supporting another overall goal (e.g. education) but don't get a lot of training on how the education system works (grade-level expectations etc) so it can be tough to know how to engage with it effectively.
School caseloads are too large.  There needs to be a mandatory cap before receiving overload pay.  
It's frustrating to pay so much money for your CCC's and then still have to pay for special interest groups and research articles. My employer requires I have my CCC's, but other than that I see no benefits that ASHA provides me.
The ability to do this job with any effectiveness is severely limited. Within healthcare, not having a stable caseload means that people are seen just for the minutes and not for the continuity. In schools, the fact that ASHA never advocated for the profession to break away from the articulation model to the amount of time needed to do language therapy that affects academics is blatantly obvious. Why, when we are required to have an academic impact, are we stuck back in the 2x30 mindset when we should be able to be in classrooms frequently and meaningfully. Why are we spending our day running to see kids for their short amount of time, moving between multiple sites during the day, being expected to consult with teachers, contact families, and change a student's ability to access curriculum when we spend just minutes in a building. I think that our profession says we can do a lot of things, but the practice of the profession shows we don't have nearly the impact that ASHA likes to project that we do. We know how kids learn, we know why they fail but we don't have the opportunity to do anything about it because we're legally obligated to see the dozens and dozens of kids assigned to us. Our impact is minimal given the conditions we work in. Co-teaching? Never happens. Consulting? Never happens. And the paperwork is astronomical to document all the things we're supposed to be doing but don't have time to do. IEPs are getting completed to be sure they are in compliance, but the services aren't really what the document says they are. If we are going to be one of the most highly educated individuals before we can even get the job, then why are our talents so wasted by making the job completely unattainable. Why does a SPED teacher get to spend hours every day with a kid when their learning is affected by their language but we don't get more than 60 minutes a week. Our education is enormous but our profession is a joke because no one did anything to prove that we are professional educators of students with language deficits and not just people who breeze in and out. And, let's get started on the working conditions that have been around for decades. Why should I, with a masters degree and lots of credits, be relegated to working in the worst room, fighting for time with every other person in the building, having to buy my own curriculum materials, getting paid what someone with a master's from online rodeo clown college gets paid, begging teachers to do what I know is best for kids, not being included in academic decisions about kids, and basically fighting for relevance in my work setting.   It is not a profession I would recommend anyone go in to. I love what I know, but I really hate the conditions I have to do it in. 
Discrepancy in pay between education and medical settings. 
Difficulty with private practice efforts. Efficiency and profit in long term care settings- specifically productivity requirements. Training for specific avenues, such as dysphagia, apraxia, complex communicators are lacking in graduate school and are time consuming and expensive to learn about post grad.
Moderate perceived weakness: #1 Advocacy for inequity in pay, caseloads, and ability to implement quality school based services.  #2 Big 9: numerous areas to be responsible/experts 
ASHA as a whole seems to be something that I pay to participate in to have the CCCs associated with my license.  I have always felt it "necessary" to be a part of of ASHA but have not felt the benefits of this association.  I complete all of my CEUs through a separate, private group, and really only interact with ASHA when I have to pay my dues.  I think it is a weakness of our field that the one organization that we are all involved in does not feel like the first resource we should all be going to.  One of your questions asked about ASHA PAC and I honestly have no idea what they advocate for--this could be just my lack of knowledge but it seems like I should have a better awareness of this.
insurance issues, employees classified wrongly as contract
There needs to be some separation between medically SLP compared to educational based.  Our programs are not doing a good job with this but ASHA should be doing more.  
Paperwork, IEP’s, poor pay/compensation, too many 
Outdated ableist practices have not been dismissed. High stress and insufficient wages does not do well for the fields longevity. Lack of thorough enough training for voice, swallowing, and fluency. Lack of discussion around LGBT issues such as transgender voice therapy
Salary is way to low for our education and workload.
I have experience in the schools as well as acute care. In both settings, I am very frustrated with SLP pay being significantly lower compared to our sister professions of PT, OT, and school psychology. It is unfair that we have to undergo as much (in some cases more) training as these professions but we have the least amount of pay compared to them. Sometimes I feel like our field has more knowledge across different patient populations compared to the other professions but we are not compensated for it. In the acute care setting, I noticed a lot of elitism between acute care SLPs and non-acute care medical SLPs. Acute care SLPs typically made negative comments about the competence of non-acute medical SLPs because the patients of non-acute care SLPs had lower acuities. I witnessed this behavior in acute care hospitals across two different states. In the school setting, I do not like that there are not firm caseload caps. In California, education specialists have a caseload cap of 25 students. Once they reach that cap, the school district is required to hire an additional education specialist. This is frustrating because education specialists do not administer extensive standardized tests (sometimes they just do one) or type up an assessment report. SLPs are not only responsible for keeping up with their caseload but also required to administer thorough assessments, type up the assessment report, type up the IEP, present the report at an IEP, and service the students. A caseload cap of 50 students or fewer would be manageable. Even if SLPs were provided with SLP support, they should still have a caseload cap because they are still legally responsible for the progress of the students, even if they are receiving support with administering services via SLPA.     
Research and study of Native American bilingual issues regarding testing and eligibility.
In School-based practice workload/caseload balance is not respected and barely existent. We are constantly spending hours and hours doing paperwork at home. It is exhausting. Many of us in PA are paid on the regular teacher scales even though our degrees are much more involved to obtain. I do not feel ASHA is doing anything to advocate for our profession regarding salary (especially telepractice) and workload/caseload. Schools ask for CCC, but do not give what CCC deserves. We are burning out. 
Lack of compensation for experienced SLP's
Ableism in the school setting
no
Compensation for amount of work that is expected. It always gets done, but because we're working extra hours to make it look like it can still all happen
I would like to see something like a “minor” in academics. Training that focuses solely on peds, geriatrics, feeding, stuttering, etc. Something a student can really focus and excel at. Our pay is not up to other medical standards. 
no governing global body regarding the profession and the body that governs the profession varies depending on the country we reside in
The expectation that SLP's be knowledeable across a very large scope of skills is unrealistic especially with the diverse caseloads that present themselves in a school setting. 
The need to maintain CCC’s when taking time off from the profession. 
Our lack of value when we bring so much to the table
extremely broad scope of practice
Too many SLP jobs are not permanent status, with no guaranteed job hours, no benefits or retirement.
lack of knowledge about what we do and its importance/impact, which leads to low reimbursement and high burnout
Overly broad scope of practice, lack of free CEUs offered by ASHA in order to maintain certification (it feels like just a money making avenue for them), the research to practice gap is too long
Oh my, there are so many….1. Salary 2. cost of education 3. Too many areas we are expected to be specialized in without training; the scope of our field is too broad! 4. Lack of specialized training within graduate school and the cost to acquire more is too expensive to pay personally 5. School based SLP’s are hard to locate primarily in rural areas in which the teacher pay scale is low 6. School based caseload and workload are high creating stress and high burn out.   The salary does not match the expectations.   7. I don’t feel new SLP grads are prepared to enter the school based setting with adequate knowledge in incorporating literacy and working collaboratively with teachers 
Advocacy for our growing workloads and additional duties and scope of practice that continue to come up in our work settings. I work as a preschool SLP and I have continued to see an increase each year with the number of children who qualify with a disability not only in communication, but with more severe needs which require a much higher level of support, with minimal to no regard for the needs of staff. If you want this profession to grow, then we need to have ASHA support for the workload model/lower caseloads. I have had friends leave this profession because of burnout. It is exhausting and the younger generations going into college hear this and shy away from the field. I feel like I pay a lot of money  out of pocket to ASHA and my State Board for nothing because workload is not enforced by the organizations, therefore, our school districts ignore. I have tried to lead the charge several times over several years with nothing to show for it. I hope that this action group can make something happen and I would be more than willing to get behind a positive change. Thank you! 
Pushing agendas in CEU requirements; concerns/fear of expectations to possibly violate my conscience in the future
Lack of advocacy, lower salary
Pay is low, caseloads too high.
I have been practicing for 10 years. I have interviewed for both educational, private, and medical settings in different states, in both urban and rural settings. All places have offered someone of my experience more than 10% below the median salary. We also need more diversity in our field: bilingual, racial, and gender. Clients both children and adults of different cultures also deserve someone from their own background. That is not to say that SLPs can't grow and learn in knowledge of diversity, there is simply an advantage to having diverse practitioners.
appropriate compensation for health care SLPs
I think that graduate programs could do a better job preparing the next generation of medical SLPs rather than focusing on pediatrics for 3/4 of the coursework in undergrad and grad school. I also feel that we are poorly respected in the medical community because our title is deceiving; Everything thinks we only help people talk. 
Lack of advocacy for increasing (NOT DECREASING) Insurance reimbursement rates, which affect salaries of private practice clinicians - with 8 years of experience in muliple settings, the best offer I could get was $66,000 with poor benefits - catastrophic coverage only, no HSA matching, no retirement contributions. 
It's very difficult to keep up with research when we're being charged more than a textbook for access to one research article.  ASHA membership should include access to more relevant research.  I also think there is a weakness in that many medical/private practice SLPs give parents the message that school-based services are inferior in some way.  School based SLPs have the same knowledge and training, but not the same level of respect or pay.  The issue with school based services is the ridiculous caseload sizes some SLPs are being asked to manage in the school setting.  Allowing these astronomical numbers degrades the quality of students' services and by doing so degrades the effectiveness and reputation of our profession.  I do not think SLPAs are the answer.  That is a slippery slope and just makes SLPs into administrators--not what I went to graduate school for.
I have a very hard time with SLPs being on the same pay scale as other educators. I could not obtain a Master's degree in speech-pathology while working a full-time job due to the intensity of our training. I also needing many more graduate credits to obtain my degree, yet for some reason I am on the same pay scale as a teacher. No one can do what I do, since they are not a licensed SLP and school districts twiddle their fingers when they can't hire SLPs, yet they aren't willing to pay them more. I see our profession shifting mostly to the private sector (especially in schools). However, there are issues with that as well such as low imbursement rates. 
Salaries could be a bit higher. The increased use of contract therapists is a negative in terms of building a team, and advancement as well as benefits provided.
Concerning salary: In an educative cooperative, monies to pay salaries comes from school districts' special ed. funds so there is no money for salaries. 
so much continuing ed is online now and ASHA and state license discriminate between online vs live hours making it difficult to keeping up skills while following their live vs online guidelines
Understanding of our scope and practice- not just /l, r, s/
SLPs are expected to manage very high caseloads in the education systems and schedule Tx around everyone and everything else which is difficult. 
little to no respect for the profession from other professionals, scope of practice is too big to have a solid understanding of each disorder and treatment, Pay is too low across settings (paid as a teacher in the schools and equitable with COTAs and PTAs in the hospital/ SNF settings), no cap on caseload- meaning no limit to how many kids or schools you could be given, No SLP Union to protect us and advocate for us, no training upon beginning the SLP job, also higher prevalence of people reporting dealing with imposter syndrome and other mental health issues due to the job. If working in schools, required to maintain and pay for 3 certifications and attend non-SLP meetings since we are considered teachers (using up much needed planning time that I would otherwise not have), NO guaranteed breaks or lunch time allowances. No time to read and learn new techniques fully because we are already overworked. And no ability to pause professional affiliations due to life changes. Feels like we do SO much work for only little to no respect and inadequate pay.
It extremely difficult to provide "individualistic" continued care for high caseloads of clients with diverse needs. I feel limited in my knowledge, resources and time, but yet all the weight and responsibility to make change/progress. I also wish there was more collaboration (within the profession and other disciplines) built into the field
ableism and lack of diversity are  significant weaknesses in the field. 
The lack of a universal license across the USA and ASHA only supporting the CCC, which don't function as a universatl license, is a significant perceived weakness.  We should be moving to a universal license so that SLPs have the ability to move easily to other states to provide support or offer teletherapy support without the hassle and expense of obtaining licensure in each state.  
Workload must be addressed successfully.  It has been an issue for 30+ years
Why more males are not more involved in the profession.
Unrealistic expectations of caseload
Lack of advocacy related to our broad scope, the amount of work we do/high stress level but low pay

High caseload numbers in many school settings; job stress caused by those high caseloads and required paperwork;
Working more than paid hours
Salary ranges posted do not accurately reflect what actual pay ranges are in all states. 
Optional
Workloads and caseloads are unmanageable
Many.  I left the field full time in 2020 and felt that the field was significantly underpaid, research access and quality were laughably inadequate for me to do my job well. ASHA membership functionally gains me nothing.  When I considered not renewing, I was threatened that my education would be invalidated.  Infighting seems prevalent.  The lack of evidence for how we do things and the level of disagreement practitioners have on basic elements of our work disturbs me.
Discussions on race/inclusivity within the field; discussions of pay in private practice settings/outpatient settings
We are all spread thin, whether in the medical field or school setting. Our scope is so broad it can also get very overwhelming, resulting in burn out and people leaving the field
It is extrememly hard to move across settings, lack of full time work with benefits
More diversity on ALL levels, higher education, placements, student body