5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

Making effective communication, a human right, accessible and achievable for all.

Search                                                                                                           

Augmentative and Alternative Communication

                                                                                                                 Collapse All

Overview

The scope of this page is augmentative and alternative communication across the lifespan.

See ASHA's Augmentative and Alternative Communication evidence map for summaries of the available research
on this topic.

Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) is an area of clinical practice that supplements or compensates
for impairments in speech-language production and/or comprehension, including spoken and written modes of
communication. AAC falls under the broader umbrella of assistive technology, or the use of any equipment, tool, or
strategy to improve functional daily living in individuals with disabilities or limitations.

AAC uses a variety of techniques and tools to help the individual express thoughts, wants and needs, feelings, and ideas,
including the following:

       manual signs
       gestures
       finger spelling
       tangible objects
       line drawings
       picture communication boards and letter boards
       speech-generating devices

AAC is augmentative when used to supplement existing speech, alternative when used in place of speech that is absent
or not functional, or temporary as when used by patients postoperatively in intensive care (Elsahar et al., 2019).

Key Issues

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  1/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM            Augmentative and Alternative Communication

  Incidence and Prevalence

It is difficult to estimate the prevalence of AAC users due to wide variability across this population in terms of diagnosis,
age, location, communication modality, and extent of AAC use. Overall, the more severe an individual's communication
deficit, the more likely the individual would benefit from AAC support (Brown et al., 2021; Funke et al., 2018; Iacono et al.,
2016; Kristoffersson et al., 2020).

Beukelman and Light (2020) estimated that approximately 5 million Americans and 97 million people in the world
may benefit from AAC.
In the United States among students who need support when communicating, a national survey of special educators
across all 50 states reported that 18.2% of their students use a form of AAC for their communication mode: 6.9%
use gestural modes, 6.5% employ pictorial supports, and 4.8% use a speech-generating device (SGD; Andzik et al.,
2018). According to the 2009­2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, 4% of U.S.
children with developmental disabilities and 10.5% of children with special health care needs did not have their
assistive technology (AT) communication needs met (Lin et al., 2017).
In the United Kingdom, Creer et al. (2016) estimated that 0.5% of the population requires the use of AAC based on
the prevalence of conditions associated with the use of AAC in the United Kingdom. The largest populations of
individuals who could benefit from AAC had diagnoses of Alzheimer's/dementia (23%), Parkinson's disease (22%),
autism spectrum disorder (ASD; 19%), learning disabilities (13%), and stroke (11%). A survey of U.K. service
providers conducted by Judge et al. (2017) reported an average of 0.0155% of individuals known to be using
powered communication aids (e.g., voice output communication aids).
Across specific pediatric populations, Iacono et al. (2016) estimated that 25%­30% of Australian children with
autism have limited speech skills and would benefit from AAC. Kristoffersson et al. (2020) found that 44.4% of
Swedish children with cerebral palsy used a form of AAC either exclusively or to supplement their speech. Brown et
al. (2021) identified 6.9% of U.S. children with cleft palate or craniofacial anomalies as AAC users.
A review of medical records at the University of Iowa Hospitals & Clinics found that 33% of intensive care unit (ICU)
patients met the AAC candidacy criterion, whereas 3% of non-ICU patients met the AAC candidacy criterion (Zubow
& Hurtig, 2013). Similarly, in the ICU setting, an Australian cohort study found that patients were unable to
communicate verbally 17% of the time and staff reported difficulty communicating with patients 35% of the time.
Despite these communication breakdowns, ICU patients used alternative modes (e.g., gestures, mouthing, personal
electronic device) during only 11% of their time in the ICU (Freeman-Sanderson et al., 2019).
Among adults with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in Scotland, Elliott et al. (2020) found 17.3% of ALS patients
acquired AAC equipment for speech augmentation, speech replacement, or written communication support. In
Germany, 46% of patients demonstrated the need for AAC, yet 39% failed to access an AAC device (Funke et al.,
2018).

Roles and Responsibilities

Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) play a central role in the screening, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of
persons requiring AAC intervention. The professional roles and activities in speech-language pathology include
clinical/educational services (diagnosis, assessment, planning, and treatment), advocacy, education, administration, and
research.

Appropriate roles for medical/clinical SLPs include the following:

Provide training for medical and allied health professionals, educators, family members, and community members
about AAC use and the impact of AAC on quality of life.
Educate other professionals and caregivers on the needs of persons using AAC and the role of SLPs in meeting the
needs of individuals who use AAC.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2           2/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                      Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Serve as a liaison between the family and the SGD provider.

Screen individuals who may benefit from AAC intervention.

Conduct a culturally and linguistically relevant, comprehensive assessment of the individual's speech, language,

and overall communication abilities.

Conduct a comprehensive, transdisciplinary, culturally and linguistically relevant AAC assessment.

Develop and implement culturally and linguistically relevant intervention plans to maximize effective communication

between individuals who use AAC and their communication partners across the life span.

Determine the need for further assessment and/or referral for other services.

Refer to other professionals (rehabilitation engineer, AT professional, occupational therapist, physical therapist,

music therapist, vision specialist, special educator, respite care worker) to facilitate access to comprehensive

services, reduce barriers, and maximize opportunities for successful AAC use.

Involve individuals and family members in decision making to the greatest extent possible throughout the

assessment and intervention process.

Document progress, determine appropriate AAC modifications, and determine dismissal and follow-up criteria, if

indicated.

Provide programming support, technical support, trialing of additional systems, and AAC/language development

strategies, as necessary.

Generate reports to help with funding and collaborate with funding agencies.

Counsel persons who use AAC and their families/caregivers regarding communication-related issues and provide

education aimed at preventing abandonment and other complications relating to AAC use.

Serve as an integral member of an interdisciplinary team working with individuals who use AAC and their

families/caregivers.

Remain informed of research in the area of AAC and help advance the knowledge base regarding AAC assessment

and intervention.

Use evidence-based practice to evaluate functional outcomes of AAC intervention.

Know about funding sources and the requirements for applying for funding from each source.

Advocate for individuals and their families/caregivers.

Roles and Responsibilities of School-Based SLPs

Appropriate roles for school-based SLPs include the following:

       Complete the comprehensive speech-language evaluation.
       Consider the student's need for AT, including AAC.
       Request, coordinate, or conduct a transdisciplinary AAC evaluation within the student's natural environment and
       educational setting that includes both the student and their caregiver(s).
       Provide trial periods with AAC systems and collect data.
       Provide a variety of multimodal supports (no-tech/rapid access, low-tech/light-tech, and high-tech) to allow the
       student to communicate across various environments in the school setting.
       Collaboratively write and implement goals related to speech, language, literacy, participation, and use of AAC as
       part of the individualized education program (IEP) team.
       Ensure that the student's needs are met by others on the evaluation and treatment team.
       Provide initial and ongoing training to teachers, parents, and support staff about AAC and the needs of students who
       use AAC.
       Participate in IEP meetings.
       Ensure that AAC goals and AAC use are documented in a student's IEP.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2      3/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Provide transition support and documentation if AAC is deemed necessary for the student as they exit the school

system.

As indicated in the ASHA Code of Ethics, SLPs shall engage in only those aspects of the profession that are within the
scope of their professional practice and competence, considering their level of education, training, and experience. If an
SLP has inadequate experience/training and is unable to assist an AAC user, an SLP refers to or (at minimum) consults
with an SLP with experience in AAC.

AAC Populations

Individuals who use AAC have an impairment or a limitation in speech, language, reading, and/or writing. These can be
the result of congenital disabilities, acquired disabilities, or neurological differences such as autism.

Examples of congenital disabilities that may benefit from AAC include

       cerebral palsy,
       developmental apraxia of speech,
       developmental disability,
       genetic disorders, and
       intellectual disability.

Individuals with congenital disabilities may continue to acquire language while using AAC. AAC may also serve as a tool
to aid in expressive and receptive language acquisition and literacy development in this population. AAC needs may vary
and change over time.

Examples of acquired disabilities that may benefit from AAC include

       cerebrovascular accidents (i.e., stroke);
       traumatic or acquired brain injuries;
       neurodegenerative diseases, such as

               ALS,
               supranuclear palsy,
               primary progressive aphasia, and
               apraxia;
       disability following surgeries (e.g., glossectomy, laryngectomy); and
       temporary/intermittent conditions for
               patients in critical care settings (e.g., intubated patients) and
               patients with acute laryngitis.

AAC needs for individuals with acquired disabilities vary and may change over time, depending on language and
cognitive status at the time of injury as well as on disease onset and progression.

AAC Systems

An AAC system is an integrated group of components used to enhance communication. These components include
forms of AAC (described below), symbols, selection techniques, and strategies.

The design of an AAC system should incorporate individual strengths and needs. It considers the individual's full
communication abilities and may include existing speech, vocalizations, gestures, and/or some form of external system
(e.g., SGD).

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             4/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                     Augmentative and Alternative Communication

An individual may use multiple modalities or many forms of AAC in combination, allowing for change based on context,

audience, and communicative intent. A well-designed AAC system is flexible and adaptable. It allows for changes to

vocabulary and mode of access as the individual's language and physical needs change over time.

Forms

AAC is typically divided into two broad categories.

Unaided--do not require an external tool. Unaided forms require some degree of motor control. Unaided forms include
the following:

body language
facial expressions
finger spelling
gestures
manual signs
vocalizations
verbalizations

Aided--require some form of external tool, either electronic or nonelectronic. Nonelectronic aided forms are often
referred to as "light-tech" or "low-tech." Electronic forms may be referred to as "high-tech."

Low-tech/light-tech options include the following:

       communication boards/books
       objects
       pictures
       photographs
       visual schedules
       writing

High-tech options include the following:

       computer/tablet/smartphone
               communication apps, such as AAC software that enables dynamic symbol/language representation
               text-to-speech features
               texting
               drawing/writing using a tablet

       single-message devices and recordable/digitized devices
       SGDs

An individual may use one form of AAC alone or utilize a combination of unaided AAC, low-tech/light-tech aided AAC,
and/or high-tech aided AAC forms.

People who use AAC should always have access to their communication tools or devices. Concerns about the overuse of
screen time, particularly for young children, do not apply to the use of screens as part of an AAC system.

SGDs often have different voice output options to allow users to select a voice based on the following:

age
ethnicity
gender
language(s) used

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2       5/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                     Augmentative and Alternative Communication

          race

However, voice output options may be limited and may not accurately reflect an individual's culture. SLPs should be
mindful that work continues to be needed to develop AAC treatment and assessment that is culturally responsive (Mindel,
2020).

These devices use synthesized speech output, digitized speech output, or both.

       Synthesized speech is electronically produced. Phonemes and allophones of the target language are used to
       generate digital speech signals that are transformed into intelligible speech. Newer technology uses parameters and
       vocal characteristics of the speaker's former or residual speech. Through voice banking, an individual can record a
       large inventory of speech, which is then used to create a synthetic voice that approximates their natural voice
       (Costello, 2011/2016). See Steve Gleason's Synthetic Voice for an example. Voice banking should be completed
       when a communicator's energy and skills are sufficient to generate clear speech.
       Digitized speech consists of natural speech that has been recorded, stored, and reproduced. Nonspeech sounds,
       such as laughter or the sound of a car horn, can also be recorded. Through message banking, an individual can
       use their own voice or a proxy voice to digitally record and store messages, which may include words, phrases,
       sentences, and sounds using natural voice, inflection, and intonation. Those messages are then stored on, and
       reproduced by, the AAC device (Costello, 2011/2016).

Comparison of Synthesized and Digitized Speech Output

Synthesized Speech                   Digitized Speech

Less "natural sounding"              More "natural sounding"

Requires less device memory storage  Requires more device memory storage

Allows for generation of speech in   Allows for recording of speech in an individual's voice, reflecting their
multiple languages                   language(s) and dialect(s) used

Allows for novel message generation  Limited novel message generation (number of possible utterances is
                                     limited to recorded items)

SGDs should also have customization/individualization options for users to select icons, vocabulary, and
languages/dialects that meet their unique needs.

Additional Augmentative Supports

In addition to AAC, other support systems exist for individuals with differences in expressive or receptive communication.
These include additional augmentative supports and hearing AT systems. These devices are considered AT but do not fall
under AAC, because they do not require skilled SLP intervention prior to use.

Supports include the following:

       amplification
               hearing aids
               cochlear implants
               Hearing Assistive Technology Systems (HATS)
                      personal amplification devices
                      text telephones

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  6/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                   Augmentative and Alternative Communication

                  Telecommunications Device for the Deaf

                  Teletype

Braille

voice amplifiers and artificial phonation devices

                  electrolarynx devices

                  intraoral devices

                  speech valves (for individuals with tracheostomies or ventilators)

HATS may aid communication among individuals who are not able to communicate via sign language or choose not to do
so (see ASHA's Practice Portal pages on Hearing Loss in Adults and Hearing Aids For Adults).

Symbols

Symbols are used in AAC to represent objects, actions, concepts, and emotions. They can include the following:

       facial expressions
       gestures
       objects
       photographs
       drawings
       auditory symbols (e.g., spoken words)
       orthography (i.e., alphabet-based symbols)
       3-D symbols or tactile symbols

Symbols may not have the same meaning or relevance across different languages and cultures. Responsive practices
consider what is meaningful for each device user.

Iconicity is the association made between a symbol and the item for which it stands (referent; Schlosser, 2003). Iconicity
is classified depending on how easily the meaning of a symbol can be guessed.

       Transparent symbols are readily guessable in the absence of the referent, such as a photograph or written word.
       Opaque symbols are not readily guessable even when the meaning of the symbol is known, such as an
       individualized gesture.
       Translucent symbols lie between transparent and opaque symbols. The meaning of the referent may not be
       obvious, but the relationship between symbol and referent is more obvious when additional information is provided
       (Fuller & Lloyd, 1991).

Iconicity directly affects the communicator's efficiency and effectiveness, especially with untrained or unfamiliar
communication partners. High iconicity refers to displaying a symbol along with a written word and can help
communication partners learn and interpret symbols, particularly if no voice output is available (Wilkinson & McIlvane,
2002). Language representation methods (LRMs) refer to three common ways that symbols are used to represent
language. The following LRMs are commonly used in AAC systems.

       Alphabet-based methods use traditional orthography (spelling) and rate enhancement techniques such as word or
       phrase prediction.
       Single-meaning messages use graphic symbols (e.g., photographs, drawings), each of which represents one word
       or message (e.g., touching a picture of a toy to indicate a desire or want to play with that toy).
       Semantic compaction is based on the concept of multiple-meaning iconic encoding and is sometimes referred
       to by its commercial name "Minspeak" (Baker, 1987). Semantic compaction combines picture symbols (icons) in
       various prescribed sequences to form words or phrases. Because a single icon can be associated with multiple

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             7/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                         Augmentative and Alternative Communication

meanings, a relatively small set of icons can be used to create many words and phrases. Early in the use of

semantic compaction, for example, frog could refer to the following concepts: "frog," "green," "jump," and "water."

Pairing frog with different symbols can communicate these various concepts--Frog + Rainbow = Green; Frog +

Arrow = Jump; Frog + Cup = Pond (Glennen, 1997). With the increase in dynamic screen technology, semantic

compaction still uses multiple-meaning icons, but the technology guides the user with screen changes and picture

representations. For example, one would now touch a rainbow to represent color words. The screen changes to

represent a picture of a hand with a crayon for the verb "color," and a row of colors at the top of the screen.

A person who uses AAC may use a single LRM or a combination of LRMs, depending on preference and the functionality
of the system.

A person's spoken vocabulary will change based on their age, communication partner, language development,
environment, mood, and context. The symbols used in an AAC system should allow for the same changes and flexibility.
Symbols are not universal across cultures. It is important to include symbols that are relevant to the individual and their
community. In addition, consider appropriate skin tone and physical features in icons that appropriately reflect the AAC
user and their community.

Symbol selection is also based on the person's ability to access, recognize, and learn each symbol's meaning. For
example, a person with visual deficits may need a symbol that is modified to be viewable or is accessible via other
sensory modes such as listening or touch.

Symbol Display

The display relates to the way in which symbols are presented on an AAC system. Different encoding options (e.g.,
alphanumeric, numeric, iconic, alphabetic, and color) are sometimes used to organize displays. Displays can be static
(fixed), dynamic (changes based on user actions), or hybrid (a combination of static and dynamic).

                                         Display Types

Static/Fixed                    Dynamic                      Hybrid

Symbols remain in a fixed       Electronic--selection of     Static/fixed display with dynamic
location.                       one symbol automatically     component (e.g., alphabet board or
Most common in                  activates change in symbol   keyboard with word prediction; grid
communication boards or low-    set.                         display that opens new page following
tech SGDs.                      Often arranged by large      user selection of a symbol).
There are a finite number of    category first and then
symbols/messages.               broken down to more
Users may have multiple fixed   specific vocabulary items.
displays (e.g., multiple pages  With use of multiple-
in a communication book).       meaning icons, selection of
                                one icon may prompt
                                display of other related
                                icons.

A visual scene is a photo or video that represents situations, routines, places, or events. Elements within the visual
scene may trigger message output when selected, also known as "hotspots."

Visual scenes may be easier to learn and use than grid displays for beginning communicators (e.g., young children or
older individuals who are at early-functioning communication stages). There is also utility for people with acquired
communication needs such as aphasia (Dietz et al., 2020). For more details about visual scene displays and an example,

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2              8/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                         Augmentative and Alternative Communication

   see Tuthill (2014).

Symbol Organization

Symbol organization on an AAC system affects the individual's ability to communicate effectively and efficiently. Symbol
organization should be appropriate to the user's language level and address the user's needs and capabilities as well as
those of the communication partners (Beukelman & Light, 2020). Organization strategies may change over time based on
changes in skills and contexts.

Most AAC systems, with the exception of visual scenes, are presented in a grid format. The organization of vocabulary,
symbol size, and number of symbols on the grid is individualized and determined by the type of display; the type of
symbol; and the visual acuity, communication and cognitive skills, integrated sensory system, and motor control of the
individual. These systems do not have to be accessed via touch; selections can be made via eye gaze, head pointing, or
scanning methods.

Semantic­syntactic displays organize vocabulary based on parts of speech and syntactic framework. Symbols are laid
out according to spoken word order and print orientation, and they are adaptable to languages that follow different
semantic rules than English (e.g., left-to-right or right-to-left, adjective­noun, noun­adjective). Semantic­syntactic
displays are useful for adults with relatively intact language (e.g., individuals with ALS) or language learners, and they can
facilitate efficient production of grammatically complex messages.

Taxonomic displays group symbols according to semantic category (e.g., people, places, feelings, actions). Typically
developing children begin to find this type of grouping helpful at around the age of 6­7 years, so this strategy may not be
appropriate for individuals at earlier stages of language development (Beukelman & Light, 2020). The use of taxonomic
displays for persons with aphasia can add to the cognitive and linguistic load and may lead to increased errors and slower
response time (Petroi et al., 2011).

Activity grid displays (also known as "schematic grid layouts" or "activity-based displays") organize vocabulary by event
schemes, routines, or activities. Each page or display includes activity-specific vocabulary and may be further organized
by part of speech (e.g., nouns, verbs). Activity grid displays can increase participation and syntactic development by
encouraging use of multiword combinations (Drager et al., 2003). Users may be able to navigate independently from one
activity display to another, or they may rely on a facilitator or communication partner to provide the appropriate activity
display for a given situation.

Context-based displays are similar to activity grid displays but are designed for a particular (usually frequent) context or
environment, allowing for greater generalization than vocabulary designed around a single, specific activity. Context-
based displays require a well-developed combination of core and fringe vocabulary.

Pragmatic Organization Dynamic Display (PODD) is a system of organizing and selecting words or symbol vocabulary
on a low-tech/light-tech or high-tech AAC system, so that individuals with complex communication needs and their
communication partners can communicate more easily. The aim is to provide vocabulary for continuous communication
all the time, across a range of different topics, using a variety of messages.

PODD communication books can vary depending on the specific needs of the individual, in

symbol size,
number of items on a page,
language complexity,
access method, and
presentation mode (visual or auditory).

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2         9/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Vocabulary organization considers communicative function and flow of conversational discourse. Books include symbols

for navigation, such as "I have something to say" and "Go to page____"; colored page tabs that match page numbers;

and symbols for specific operational commands, such as "Turn the page," "Go back to page__," and so forth. The first

pages of the PODD book often include words or phrases to support behavioral and environmental regulation and may

also include pragmatic starters, such as "Something's wrong," "I want something," or "I'm asking a question," to help

individuals convey contextual information (Porter & Cafiero, 2009). PODD can help increase communication because of

the focus on the communication partner to work with the client to maneuver the PODD book.

Inclusive Vocabulary Selection

Selection and inclusion of functional, personalized, and meaningful vocabulary within an AAC system can lead to greater
intervention success and decreased likelihood of abandonment (Moorcroft et al., 2019) of AAC supports. The SLP
considers the individual's needs for communicating with family members and other communication partners (e.g., in social
contexts, academic settings, medical settings, vocational settings, etc.). The vocabulary selected is commensurate with
peers, relevant to the individual's language, dialects, culture, and personal identities. Our personal lexicons shift over
time. AAC devices should provide users with opportunities to grow and speak about their personal relationships with their
loved ones. Nouns tend to dominate vocabulary sets for AAC users (Dark & Balandin, 2007); however, the inclusion of
verbs and other parts of speech can increase AAC acceptance and use (Adamson et al., 1992).

Vocabulary is often divided into two categories: core and fringe (or "extended"). Core vocabulary consists of high-
frequency words that make up about 80% of the words used by most people every day (Quick et al., 2019). Core
vocabulary contains mostly pronouns, verbs, descriptors, and question words (Witkowski & Baker, 2012). English
language learners use a comparable amount of core vocabulary as do native English speakers (Boenisch & Soto, 2015).
Fringe vocabulary consists of lower frequency words--mostly nouns--that tend to be context specific. Combining core
and fringe vocabulary can increase the frequency of AAC use (Beukelman et al., 1991; van Tilborg & Deckers, 2016;
Yorkston et al., 1988).

Selection Techniques

Selection techniques are the ways in which messages or symbols are accessed by the AAC user. There are two main
selection techniques.

Direct selection--The AAC user selects the desired symbol directly from a selection set. Direct selection can be

electronic or nonelectronic,
done with direct physical touch (e.g., body part or other object), or
done with a generated movement or signal (e.g., via joystick, eye gaze, trackball, traditional or head mouse, brain­
computer interface technology, light indicator).

Indirect selection (scanning)--Each item from a selection set is presented sequentially until the desired item appears
and is selected by using a previously agreed-upon motor movement or vocalization or by using a switch.

Presentation of items in the selection set can be auditory, tactile, or visual.
Items on the screen are presented one by one, in a row, column, or quadrant.
Partner-assisted scanning is an indirect selection technique in which the communication partner presents
messages or letter choices in a sequential fashion (visually or auditorily) to the individual, and the individual then
makes their selection using a previously agreed-upon motor act (e.g., blinking, grunting, nodding, raising a hand,
etc.). Partner-assisted scanning

       is used with individuals who have severe motor, visual, and/or communication impairments;
       may be used with individuals who do not yet have established means of alternative access; and
       may be used as an alternative when the primary system is unavailable or not functioning.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2         10/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                    Augmentative and Alternative Communication

                  Comparing Direct and Indirect Selection Techniques

Direct Selection                                   Indirect Selection

Less load on working memory of user and listener   Greater demand on listener's and user's working
Can be used with high-tech or low-tech/light-tech  memory
systems                                            Can be used with high-tech or low-tech systems
Requires more precise and accurate motor           Requires less fine-motor control
movements                                          Requires intermediary steps between the motor act
One-to-one relationship between the motor act and  and message generation
message generation                                 Can be used by individuals with significant visual
Requires greater visual and/or auditory acuity     and/or auditory deficits

Communicative Competence

Communicative competence is an individual's ability to freely express ideas, thoughts, and feelings to a variety of
listeners across contexts. It provides the means to achieve personal, educational, vocational, and social goals (Calculator,
2009; Light & McNaughton, 2014; Lund & Light, 2007). Individuals must achieve communicative competence whether
they use natural speech or AAC, but their paths may vary (Light et al., 2003).

Communicative competence for AAC users consists of the following five individual competencies (Light et al., 2003; Light
& McNaughton, 2014).

Linguistic competence includes knowledge of and the ability to use the language(s) spoken and written in the
individual's family and community (see Language In Brief) as well as knowledge of and the ability to use the
linguistic code (symbols, syntax, grammar) of the AAC system.
Operational competence requires skill in the technical operation of AAC systems and techniques, including

       having the motor movements needed for unaided approaches,
       using selection techniques for aided approaches,
       navigating in and between systems,
       turning an electronic device on and off and charging it, and
       operating electronic equipment and/or navigating pages in a low-tech system.
Strategic competence is the ability to use available features to convey messages efficiently and effectively,
including
       asking for choices due to vocabulary limitations,
       using word/phrase prediction to enhance efficiency,
       using an introductory (pre-stored) statement to explain AAC to unfamiliar communication partners, and
       asking one's communication partner to write or type messages to aid in understanding and to repair
       communication breakdowns.
Social competence is knowing what, where, with whom, when and when not to, and in what manner to
communicate. Social communication skills include
       turn-taking,
       initiating and terminating communication,
       topic maintenance, and
       code-switching.
       requesting attention;
       requesting or providing information; and
       pragmatic skills, such as

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  11/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                   Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Psychosocial competence is the ability to manage the demands and challenges of daily life, maintain a state of

mental well-being, and demonstrate adaptive and positive behavior during communication (World Health

Organization [WHO], 1997). Psychosocial competence for AAC users includes

                  being motivated to communicate,

                  having a positive attitude toward the use of AAC,

                  having confidence in one's ability to communicate effectively in a given situation, and

                  being resilient--persisting in the face of communication failures.

Assessment

See the Assessment section of the Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) Evidence Map for pertinent
scientific evidence, expert opinion, and client/caregiver perspective.

The goal of an AAC assessment is to determine the system component that will optimize communication for the user.
AAC assessment is an ongoing process; ongoing evaluation and decision making are required, even after an AAC system
has been selected. Elements of dynamic assessment and other informal assessments are used to supplement
standardized assessment data. See Assessment Tools, Techniques, and Data Sources for a description of testing and
data collection options.

Exposing individuals to symbols and systems prior to assessment may ensure more accurate assessment results. This
can be accomplished by providing core and fringe vocabulary supports in the home and day environment (e.g.,
classroom) and by introducing visually represented language using a variety of communication display forms and sizes
prior to the formal assessment process.

Assessment considers the needs of the individual. Needs may include one or more of the following:

       augmentative means of communication to facilitate natural speech;
       alternative means of communication to replace verbal speech, writing, or expressive language;
       temporary or permanent need for AAC; and/or
       means of communication to facilitate more appropriate alternate behaviors.

Primary, secondary, and tertiary components of the AAC system are also considered during assessment.

       Primary components are those that perform the functions of natural language and have the greatest impact on
       communication performance (e.g., symbols, vocabulary, methods of utterance generation).
       Secondary components relate to the way the individual uses and interacts with the system (e.g., user interface,
       selection method and output).
       Tertiary components are often external to the system itself but affect long-term use and ongoing success with the
       system (e.g., switches, portability, mounts, training and support; Hill & Corsi, 2012).

SLPs also collaborate and engage with family members and caregivers during the assessment. These individuals can
often report consistent behaviors and current means of communication beyond what the SLP may directly
assess/observe. Lack of family involvement in the AAC process is cited as a significant factor in device abandonment.
Therefore, incorporating family members into the AAC process is crucial (Bailey et al., 2006; Moorcroft et al., 2019).
Abandonment of an AAC system is used here to mean that an individual has stopped using an AAC device even though
one is still needed. Abandonment occurs in approximately one third of cases (Zangari & Kangas, 1997), even if the
system is well designed and functional (Johnson et al., 2006).

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  12/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

The assessment should be conducted in the language(s) needed by the AAC user. Unique characteristics, linguistic

background, and cultural variables that affect communication style and use are considered and reflected in assessment

and treatment plans. Interpretation services may be needed (see Collaborating With Interpreters, Transliterators, and

Translators).

If the individual (and/or communication partner) wears hearing aids or prescription eyeglasses, these should be worn
during the assessment. Hearing aids should be inspected prior to the assessment to ensure that they are in working
order. SLPs should obtain documentation of hearing and vision evaluations or make referrals as appropriate.

Environmental modifications should be made to accommodate vision or hearing deficits and any other physical difficulties.
These modifications may include the following:

special lighting
physical positioning of the individual relative to their communication partner
volume of the SGD
additional personal amplification, if needed
modifications of physical space to accommodate wheelchairs or other specialty seats

Consistent with the WHO's International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) framework (ASHA,
2016; WHO, 2014), a comprehensive assessment of individuals with AAC needs is conducted to identify and describe

       impairments in body structure and function, including underlying strengths and weaknesses in speech sound
       production, verbal/nonverbal communication, and gross and fine motor skills for writing and accessing an AAC
       system;
       comorbid deficits, such as apraxia of speech, dysarthria, ASD, intellectual disability, and neurodegenerative
       disease;
       the individual's limitations in activity and participation, including functional status in communication,
       interpersonal interactions, and learning potential;
       contextual (environmental and personal) factors that serve as barriers to, or facilitators of, successful
       communication and life participation; and
       the impact of communication impairments on quality of life and functional limitations relative to premorbid
       communication status (where applicable).

See Person-Centered Focus on Function: Augmentative and Alternative Communication for Adult with Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) [PDF] and Person-Centered Focus on Function: Augmentative and Alternative Communication for
Child with Cerebral Palsy [PDF] for examples of assessment data consistent with the ICF framework.

Comprehensive Assessment for AAC: Typical Components

Many components of the comprehensive assessment may already be documented in an individual's records (i.e., medical
or school records). The components listed below may be completed if not addressed in these records.

Case History

       medical status and history, education, occupation, and linguistic backgrounds
       history and current use of AAC systems, including motivation to use AAC
       prognosis and potential for disease progression, when applicable

   Ecological Inventory                                                                                                13/37

          current communication skills and needs
          communication skills in relation to similarly matched peers
          communication skills in relation to the environment

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

   Self-Report

functional communication success
communication difficulties and impact on individual and family/caregiver
contexts of concern (e.g., social interactions, work activities)
language(s) used in contexts of concern
individual's goals and preferences

Sensory and Motor Status

       vision--ability to see symbols/text on the AAC system
       physical/motor status--means of access to the AAC system (positioning, fine motor, gross motor)
       integrated sensory system--ability to regulate and ready the body for communication

Hearing Screening

See Childhood Hearing Screening and Hearing Screening.

Speech Sound Assessment

See the Assessment section of the following ASHA Practice Portal resources: Speech Sound Disorders: Articulation and
Phonology, Childhood Apraxia of Speech, and Acquired Apraxia of Speech.

Expressive and Receptive Language Assessment

The SLP should complete a comprehensive speech and language assessment relative to an individual's needs. An SLP
should evaluate expressive and receptive skills, including

       an individual's method of expressing communicative intent;
       current means of communication and their effectiveness (verbal and nonverbal);
       vocabulary size and word types used and understood;
       word combinations and grammatical forms used and understood;
       the ability to follow commands;
       the ability to respond to yes/no questions; and
       the ability to correctly point to objects, words, and pictures given an auditory stimulus.

See the Assessment section of the following ASHA Practice Portal resources: Spoken Language Disorders, Late
Language Emergence, and Aphasia.
Written Language Assessment (Reading and Writing)
See the Assessment section of Written Language Disorders.
Social Communication Assessment
See the Assessment section of Social Communication Disorder.
Cognitive Communication Assessment
Memory, attention, problem-solving, and executive skills in the context of functional AAC use.
See Traumatic Brain Injury in Adults and Evaluating and Treating Communication and Cognitive Disorders: Approaches to
Referral and Collaboration for Speech-Language Pathology and Clinical Neuropsychology.
Symbol Assessment
Ability to use various symbol features to meet current and future communication needs, including

       type of symbol (e.g., objects, pictures, letters, printed text),

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2       14/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM          Augmentative and Alternative Communication

symbol size,

field size (e.g., number of symbols in a display), and

organization of display.

Feature-Matching Assessment

Based on individual skills and needs, determine appropriate AAC system features, including

       the ability to facilitate written communication,
       the capability to allow a range of communication functions,
       capacity for use in varying environments and with different partners,
       type and number of symbols,
       type of display and display features (e.g., color vs. black and white, static vs. dynamic, hybrid),
       input type (i.e., direct vs. indirect selection),
       output (i.e., type of speech, voice),
       options for physical positioning and need for accessories (e.g., mounts or switches),
       portability,
       the capability to be modified to allow for changes in communication abilities and needs,
       AAC user preference,
       the ability to motivate use by an individual, and
       affordability and ease of maintenance.

See the Resources section of this document for sample feature-matching charts and checklists.

Identification of Contextual Facilitators and Barriers

       Facilitators such as
               the ability and willingness to use AAC systems,
               family support,
               motivation to communicate, and
               technological knowledge/abilities of the user and family.

       Barriers such as
               reduced confidence in communication,
               cognitive deficits,
               visual and motor impairments,
               lack of acceptance of disability and/or AAC use,
               limitations in the capability of the AAC system, and
               seating and positioning limitations across environments.

Assessment Considerations

AAC assessments may be time consuming, and if all questions are unanswered, continued assessment may progress
alongside treatment. Trials of specific devices are often a component of AAC treatment, and an individual's success with a
specific device may not be effectively determined upon initial assessment.

Treatment

See the Treatment section of the Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) Evidence Map for pertinent
scientific evidence, expert opinion, and client/caregiver perspective.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  15/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

The goal of intervention is to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of communication for individuals who are unable

to communicate via verbal speech. Whenever possible, intervention takes place in a naturalistic environment in order to

promote generalization and functional use. Potential areas of focus for treatment include using AAC to

improve functional communication,
increase language and literacy skills,
improve speech production and comprehensibility with the use of multiple modalities,
decrease challenging behaviors, and
improve social communication.

AAC interventions address the development of adequate, functional communication skills to support individuals with
complex communication needs in developing, rebuilding, or sustaining communicative competence to express needs and
wants, develop social closeness, exchange information, and participate in social etiquette routines (Drager et al., 2010;
Light & McNaughton, 2014).

AAC intervention requires ongoing collaborative decision making and training to promote communicative competence and
language and literacy development, as well as modifications to AAC systems to support changes in communication needs
over time. For individuals using aided approaches, intervention may include customization of vocabulary, rate
enhancement features that allow users to produce language with fewer keystrokes, and updates to software for high-tech
devices.

Preferred practice for AAC intervention incorporates multiple communication modalities so that the user is not restricted to
aided or unaided approaches but can use a combination of communication modalities, depending on the environment,
listener, and intent of the message.

See Person-Centered Focus on Function: Augmentative and Alternative Communication for Adult with Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) [PDF] and Person-Centered Focus on Function: Augmentative and Alternative Communication for
Child with Cerebral Palsy [PDF] for examples of functional goals consistent with the ICF framework.

Working With Other Professionals

SLPs often collaborate with other professionals to improve the success of AAC intervention.

       Physical and occupational therapists assist with positioning and selection methods for AAC users.
       Vision specialists assist in determining the best ways for an individual to process and understand symbols and to
       reduce visual barriers to symbols.
       Rehabilitation engineers or AT professionals help SLPs and AAC users with programming, accessibility, and efficient
       use of the AAC device.
       Special education and classroom teachers can help the SLP incorporate curriculum-related vocabulary into the AAC
       system and facilitate the use of the AAC system in the classroom.
       Behavior specialists assist in identifying communicative intent and embedding AAC systems into daily activities.
       Vocational rehabilitation specialists provide education to employers regarding workplace accessibility and inclusion
       of the AAC user in vocational activities.
       Members of the medical team include nurses, doctors, case managers, and social workers to assist with medical
       management and transition planning.

See Collaboration and Teaming and Interprofessional Education/Interprofessional Practice (IPE/IPP).

Communication Partner Involvement and Training

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2           16/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                           Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Communication partners are integral to the assessment and treatment process. Family, friends, and caregivers bring an

important and unique understanding of the strengths, challenges, and needs of the individual who uses AAC. In addition

to helping the individual identify goals and objectives for treatment, they often have input into the type of AAC system

used, daily communication needs, and vocabulary incorporated into the system. This helps ensure carryover and

functional use of the system in everyday life. Partial or complete abandonment of AAC can occur when partner input is not

considered during AAC intervention (Angelo et al., 1995; H. P. Parette et al., 2000; P. Parette et al., 2000). See Family-

Centered Practice for general guidelines.

Communication partner training facilitates effective communication and incorporates instruction in the following skills:

using active listening strategies;
increasing wait time for conversational turn-taking;
using augmented input to facilitate communication (e.g., visual and environmental cues);
helping the user take advantage of rate enhancement features;
understanding the operational aspects of high-tech devices (e.g., turning the device on and off; charging and storing
the device; programming; and troubleshooting); and
supporting the communication of the person who uses AAC across contexts, and communication partners.

The SLP trains multiple communication partners, including other professionals who work with the AAC user.

Inadequate training of communication partners has been identified as a barrier to device use in addition to limitations of
the AAC device itself and insufficient involvement in device selection (Bailey et al., 2006). For example, communication
partners are more likely to ask yes/no questions instead of open-ended questions, dominate the conversation, or fail to
respond to the individual's communication attempts when communicating with children who use AAC (Kent-Walsh &
McNaughton, 2005).

Successful integration of AAC devices depends on the consistency of use. For instance, a device may not be maximally
effective if it is used only at home but not in other situations (e.g., school or the workplace).

Treatment Approaches

Treatment selection depends on a number of factors, including the individual's communication needs, the presence and
severity of co-occurring conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, apraxia of speech, aphasia, or progressive neurological
diseases), and the individual's communication needs, including language(s) used and consideration of belief systems and
other cultural elements.

Once an AAC system is selected, intervention will initially focus on training the individual and their family/caregivers in
how to use the device and/or system components (i.e., operational competence). Interventions should incorporate use of
the AAC system into a naturalistic environment and address using the system to target broader communication goals
such as language and literacy development and social interaction.

SLPs consider strategies, target areas and goals they use in other areas of language treatment as they select and
implement AAC treatment approaches. SLPs use AAC system components to address these areas. Additionally, SLPs
consider the type and frequency of prompting they use during AAC intervention and training, including fading prompts to
facilitate independence.

Below are brief descriptions of both general and specific treatment approaches and instructional strategies for AAC
intervention. Some are prescribed interventions with specified procedures, and some are more general approaches to
language organization and/or system presentation.

This list is not exhaustive, and the inclusion of any specific treatment approach does not imply endorsement from ASHA.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             17/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Augmented input--also called "natural aided language," "aided language stimulation," or "aided language modeling"--is

a receptive language training approach in which the communication partner provides spoken words along with AAC

symbols during communication tasks (e.g., partner points to the AAC symbols while simultaneously talking).

Augmented input is based on the concept that language input provides a model for language development. This approach
can lead to increased symbol comprehension in young AAC users and in users with severe cognitive or intellectual
disabilities (Binger & Light, 2007; Drager et al., 2006, 2010), as well as increased symbol comprehension and production
(Binger & Light, 2007; C. Goossens, 1992; M. D. Harris & Reichle, 2004). In fact, this approach can be effective for
participants of many differing ages/disabilities/language skills (O'Neill et al., 2018).

Behavioral interventions are used to teach desired behaviors and are based on behavioral/operant principles of
learning (i.e., differential reinforcement, modeling, prompting, and fading). Behavioral methods involve examining
antecedents that elicit a behavior and the consequences that follow that behavior. Adjustments are made to increase
desired behaviors and/or decrease inappropriate ones. Behavioral interventions range from one-to-one discrete trial
instruction to naturalistic approaches.

Discrete trial training (DTT) is a one-to-one instructional approach that uses behavioral methods to teach skills in small
systematic steps. The teaching opportunity is a discrete trial with a clearly identified antecedent and consequence (e.g.,
reinforcement in the form of praise or tangible rewards) for desired behaviors. DTT is most often used for skills that (a)
learners are not initiating on their own; (b) have a clear, correct procedure; and (c) can be taught in a one-to-one setting. It
may be difficult to generalize learning via DTT beyond the setting in which a skill is learned.

Milieu therapy includes a range of methods--including incidental teaching, time delay, and mand-model procedures--
that are integrated into a child's natural environment. It includes training in everyday environments and during activities
that take place throughout the day, rather than only at "therapy time." Milieu language teaching and other related
procedures offer systematic approaches for prompting children to expand their repertoire of communication functions and
to use increasingly complex language skills (Kaiser et al., 1992; Kasari et al., 2014).

Incidental teaching is a teaching technique that uses behavioral procedures to teach elaborated language. Naturally
occurring teaching opportunities are provided, based on the individual's interests. The clinician reinforces the individual's
attempts to communicate as these attempts get closer to the desired communication behavior (McGee et al., 1999). The
individual should initiate contact, which begins a language teaching episode. If the person does not initiate, an expectant
look and a time delay might be sufficient to prompt language use. The clinician can prompt with a question (e.g., "What do
you want?") or model a request (e.g., "Say: I need paint.").

Time delay is a method of teaching that fades the use of prompts during instruction. For example, the time delay between
initial instruction and any additional instruction or prompting is gradually increased as the individual becomes more
proficient at the skill being taught. Time delay can be used with individuals regardless of cognitive level or expressive
communication abilities.

In Core Vocabulary Approach the clinician teaches the individual an initial set of core vocabulary that often consists of
common words used across contexts. This approach considers vocabulary used by typically communicating peers and
any additional words needed by the user based on input from members of the community (e.g., family members,
teachers). Often, words from the initial set remain in the same location to minimize demands on memory and motor
planning as more words are added to the AAC display; however, the extent to which this can happen varies depending on
the AAC system. The variety of word types (pronouns, verbs, descriptors, question words, etc.) used in a core vocabulary
approach allows the individual to complete various communicative functions, such as asking questions, requesting,
rejecting, protesting, commenting, and describing.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2      18/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                        Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Core vocabulary is likely represented by symbols or symbols combined with written words for individuals with congenital

disabilities who use AAC. The core vocabulary may consist of only written words, depending on premorbid and current

literacy level for those with acquired disabilities. A foundation of language skills based on core vocabulary is crucial if a

focus of AAC intervention is to develop oral and written communication skills (Witkowski & Baker, 2012). Core vocabulary

is reflective of all language(s) used.

Development of functional communication skills training (e.g., expressing wants and needs, gaining attention,
indicating preferences, and protesting) is often the first focus of linguistic intervention for the AAC user. For example,
individuals can be taught to make requests by using symbols, objects, or words to indicate desired objects or actions
(Johnston et al., 2012). Functional communication skills help minimize communication breakdowns and reduce the
occurrence of challenging behaviors (Carr & Durand, 1985; Mirenda, 1997).

Language Acquisition Through Motor Planning (LAMP) is a therapeutic approach based on neurological and motor
learning principles that uses a high-tech AAC system to provide the child with opportunities to initiate activity, engage in
communication around activities of their choice, and access consistent motor plans to locate vocabulary (Potts &
Satterfield, 2013).

The LAMP approach teaches the individual to independently select words and build sentences on a voice output AAC
device using consistent motor plans to access vocabulary. LAMP's emphasis on motor planning may reduce the cognitive
demands of choosing from a symbol set and may result in more automatic and faster communication (Autism Spectrum
Australia, 2013).

Mentoring programs pair young, newly proficient AAC users with older, more experienced users, with the intention of
providing positive role models; teaching higher level sociorelational skills; and improving self-confidence and desire to
achieve personal, educational, and professional goals. In addition to improving self-confidence and sociorelational skills in
the newly proficient AAC user, mentors also benefit from the training experience that prepares them for participation in
mentoring programs (Light et al., 2007).

Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS) is a low-tech intervention program for individuals with ASD and
other developmental disabilities that is intended to shape a child's expressive communication abilities using prompting
and reinforcement strategies. PECS is a specific approach with specific implementation parameters. PECS is based on
applied behavior analysis. PECS training consists of six progressive instructional phases:

1. How to Communicate--exchanging single pictures for desired items/activities
2. Distance and Persistence--generalizing picture exchange to different situations and communication partners
3. Picture Discrimination--selecting from two or more pictures (typically stored in a communication book) to request

   items/activities
4. Sentence Structure--constructing simple sentences by adding a picture of the desired item to a sentence strip that

   begins with an "I want" carrier phrase
5. Answering Questions--using a picture to request an item/activity in response to the question, "What do you want?"
6. Responsive and Spontaneous Commenting--using pictures to respond to a variety of questions (e.g., "What do you

   see?" "What do you have?" "What is this?") to introduce commenting behavior

PECS requires the facilitator to prepare pictures on and the user to accept and have the ability to transport a
communication board or book (Flippin et al., 2010).

Total communication (TC) is a holistic approach to communication that promotes the use of all modes of
communication, including sign language, spoken language, gestures, facial expressions, and environmental cues such as
pictures and sounds. TC has also been used with populations such as individuals with ASD (e.g., Nunes, 2008; Wong &
Wong, 1991).

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2                19/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                    Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Video-based instruction (also called "video modeling") is an observational mode of teaching that uses video recordings

to provide a model of a desired communication behavior. Video recordings of such a behavior (e.g., appropriate use of an

AAC device) are watched and imitated by a learner. The learner's attempts to incorporate learned communication

behaviors can also be videotaped for later review.

Visual prompting strategies use visual cues (e.g., pointing or gesturing) to help individuals maintain attention,
understand spoken language, sequence events, organize environments, or increase independence with task completion
(Hodgdon, 1995). Visual prompts can be general (e.g., gesturing toward the communication system) or specific (e.g.,
pointing to a specific display location).

Visual prompting strategies can help increase an individual's ability to independently initiate tasks, sustain participation in
an activity, perform multistep tasks, and participate in an increased variety of activities.

The use of visual prompting strategies that incorporate the same symbols from an individual's AAC system or that are
incorporated into the system itself can help the AAC user understand, anticipate, and communicate about daily routines
and can also help decrease challenging behaviors (Drager et al., 2010). Visual prompting strategies can create
opportunities to increase aided language input or augmented input.

Visual schedules are a common method of visual prompting. Visual schedules use objects, photographs, drawings,
written words, or other symbols to cue or prompt individuals to complete a sequence of tasks or activities. Symbols on the
display are presented horizontally or vertically in the sequence of occurrence and can represent activities within a day or
week (or longer period) or the steps within a particular activity. Visual schedules that initiate or sustain interaction are
called scripts. Scripts are often used to promote social interaction but can also be used in a classroom setting to facilitate
academic interactions and promote academic engagement (Hart & Whalon, 2008).

Visual schedules can be used to

improve understanding of routines and expectations,
increase engagement time,
ease transitions from one activity to the next,
provide opportunities to make choices, and
increase an individual's control over their daily life (Mechling, 2007).

Treatments Not Recommended

Facilitated communication is a discredited technique by which a "facilitator" provides physical and other supports in an
attempt to assist a person with a significant communication disability to point to pictures, objects, printed letters and
words, or a keyboard in order to communicate.

According to ASHA's position statement titled Facilitated Communication, "It is the position of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) that Facilitated Communication (FC) is a discredited technique that should not be
used. There is no scientific evidence of the validity of FC, and there is extensive scientific evidence--produced over
several decades and across several countries--that messages are authored by the `facilitator' rather than the person with
a disability. Furthermore, there is extensive evidence of harms related to the use of FC. Information obtained through the
use of FC should not be considered as the communication of the person with a disability" (ASHA, 2018a).

The Rapid Prompting Method, also known as Spelling to Communicate, is a technique in which an instructor holds a
letter board and provides prompts to encourage an individual to point to letters to spell words. According to ASHA's
position statement, Rapid Prompting Method, "It is the position of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
(ASHA) that use of the Rapid Prompting Method (RPM) is not recommended because of prompt dependency and the lack

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2         20/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM           Augmentative and Alternative Communication

of scientific validity. Furthermore, information obtained through the use of RPM should not be assumed to be the

communication of the person with a disability" (ASHA, 2018b). Please see ASHA's resource on Rapid Prompting Method

for further details.

Special Considerations: Assessment and Treatment

Accommodations for Individuals Who Use AAC

Many standardized assessments include items that require a verbal (e.g., picture naming) and/or motor (e.g., pointing)
response. For individuals who are not able to do so, it may be necessary to modify the task or the response mode.

Standardized scores cannot be used when assessments are modified because the tasks are fundamentally different
(Barker et al., 2012). Assessment should include elements of dynamic assessment and other informal assessments (e.g.,
direct observation of language use in a variety of natural contexts) to supplement standardized assessment data.

See the Assessment section of ASHA's Practice Portal page on Written Language Disorders for a discussion of task
modifications for assessing literacy skills in individuals who use AAC.

Participation Gap

When evaluating and planning for AAC intervention, the clinician considers the individual's communication abilities and
potential barriers to communication. AAC intervention is considered whenever a gap exists between the communication
abilities of the AAC user and those of their peers for individuals with congenital disabilities. AAC intervention occurs when
a gap is identified between pre- and post-injury abilities for individuals with acquired disabilities. See The Participation
Model for Augmentative and Alternative Communication [PDF] (Beukelman & Mirenda, 2013).

Eligibility for Services

Use of AAC should be considered as early as possible, regardless of etiology of the communication impairment. The goal
of AAC intervention is to facilitate communication between the individual and their communities. ASHA aligns with the
National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons With Severe Disabilities (NJC) in support of a zero-
exclusion policy for AAC services. See the Communication Bill of Rights (Brady et al., 2016; NJC, 1992).

There are no prerequisites for AAC intervention, and a variety of strategies and techniques should be implemented in
order to determine the most effective means of communication for the individual (Brady et al., 2016; Zangari & Kangas,
1997). All individuals are considered candidates for AAC intervention if their communication abilities do not meet
communication needs. The time and effort involved to implement AAC should not be a reason for exclusion from
intervention.

Cultural Considerations

Views of disability vary widely and may influence all areas of AAC service delivery, including the decision to use AAC, the
choice of AAC hardware, and the selection of vocabulary and symbol systems. SLPs collaborate with the individual and
their family members with consideration of their beliefs and views of how to incorporate AAC into their lives.

A thorough assessment includes gathering information about lifestyle, the desire to communicate, and expectations
regarding AAC use that are unique to each individual and their communication environments. Ethnographic interviews can
be used to supplement information from commercial questionnaires and surveys and can help clinicians better
understand clients' communicative needs (Jenkins & Rojas, 2020). SLPs also recognize that not all individuals who use
AAC will share the same beliefs about AAC as their families (O. Harris, 2015). SLPs consider routines, customs, and
activities that are relevant to the AAC user's culture. Please see ASHA's Practice Portal page on Cultural Responsiveness
for more information.

Linguistic Considerations

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2         21/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM              Augmentative and Alternative Communication

For individuals who speak more than one language, the clinician should collect a thorough description of prior language

exposure and proficiency as well as current level of functioning in every language used. Clinicians should also consider

changes in language proficiency due to acquired injury. For example, a bilingual individual with aphasia may no longer be

as proficient in all languages used prior to the injury. Availability of culturally and linguistically relevant vocabulary

facilitates buy-in and communicative success (Mindel & John, 2018). AAC tools should support various languages and

dialects when possible; if the AAC system does not support all of the individual's language(s), they may be unable to

communicate in the home, and carryover will be limited (Dukhovny & Kelly, 2015). In addition, the lack of access to

language(s) used will result in social isolation from that linguistic community. An SLP may consider AAC systems with the

ability to switch between messages in different languages. Several AAC companies offer devices or software that includes

multilingual functionality. See Dukhovny and Kelly (2015) for the availability of SGDs with multilingual capabilities.

Involving families and caregivers in the assessment process may involve working with an interpreter or a translator. See
Collaborating With Interpreters, Transliterators, and Translators and Cultural Responsiveness for more information.

Language Acquisition

Language acquisition via AAC is different from language acquisition through typical means. Before acquiring AAC,
children likely had (a) reduced means of expression and ability to control communication interactions and (b) fewer
opportunities for exploring and interacting with their environment. During the language learning process, AAC users
depend on someone else to provide vocabulary and content for their AAC system, and there may be few communicators
who can model language using the same form of communication that the child is expected to use (Blockberger &
Johnston, 2003; Blockberger & Sutton, 2003).

Acquisition of grammar (both morphology and syntax) can be especially challenging for AAC users who are
simultaneously acquiring language, because morphological markers (e.g., tense and plural markers) are difficult to
represent via symbols or may be excluded due to space constraints (Sutton et al., 2002).

It is essential to provide support to all beginning communicators as they develop language skills. Children must be able to
comprehend and use language to communicate with others in a wide variety of settings and to function effectively in the
classroom. For children with disabilities, the skills to support language development very often must be explicitly taught.
This includes building both receptive and expressive vocabulary (including both spoken words and AAC symbols).
Specific types of vocabulary may need to be targeted (e.g., teaching verbs and adjectives to a child who primarily uses
nouns). Once the child has acquired a good number of words and/or AAC symbols, they can be taught how to begin
combining words to form sentences (Kent-Walsh & Binger, 2009).

For pragmatic/social language, an AAC user learns to adapt their communication style based on their environment,
communication partner, and needs.

Literacy Development and AAC

Children who use AAC often receive less exposure to language and literacy due to motor, sensory, cognitive, or other
impairments.

Lack of literacy development restricts AAC users to nonorthographic symbols and limits their ability for novel message
generation (Millar et al., 2004). Nonverbal children may have difficulty acquiring phonemic awareness--an essential skill
for literacy development--because they are unable to produce the sounds (Hetzroni, 2004; Millar et al., 2004).

Literacy instruction for AAC users incorporates AAC, AT, and task adaptations that can support literacy learning in children
with complex communication needs (Hetzroni, 2004; Light & McNaughton, 2012). Many literacy activities can be adapted
to meet the needs of AAC users, for example,

print awareness activities using adapted books and modeling behaviors, such as indicating

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             22/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                   Augmentative and Alternative Communication

                  title and author,

                  front and back of the book, and

                  directionality of print;

decoding activities (e.g., segmenting and blending sounds) using materials appropriate to motor and sensory needs;

engaging in shared reading and reading discussions with ready access to a communication device and other

supports to allow maximum participation;

access to letter boards or adaptive keyboards via direct or indirect selection; and

direct instruction in decoding and encoding.

Literacy intervention for children who use AAC also includes instruction on how to read for a variety of purposes while
drawing on one's own relevant background knowledge and personal experiences (Erickson et al., 2006).

Setting Considerations

School-Based Settings

In the school-based setting, the SLP works as part of a team that typically includes general and special education
teachers, paraprofessionals, physical and occupational therapists, teachers of students with visual or hearing impairment,
music therapists, administrators, nurses, case managers, and family members.

Important considerations for this population include

       providing an AAC system that allows the student to access the general education curriculum;
       supporting the transition between home and school and between classrooms and schools; and
       other challenges, including

               securing funding for AAC devices and accessing necessary resources,
               lack of buy-in (e.g., from the educational team, administrators, or parents), and
               inconsistent implementation of AAC across school and home settings.

Challenges noted above can be overcome or prevented by

       partnering with a state tech-act agency or a regional or state support center to obtain materials and equipment for
       loaner and trial periods;
       developing a structured implementation plan with defined roles and responsibilities;
       involving the students, parents, teachers, and administrator in the AAC process from initial consideration through
       implementation;
       encouraging and promoting interprofessional education and interprofessional practice; and
       providing training as necessary and documenting need for/use of AAC.

The school-based SLP works as part of a team that may include an AAC or AT specialist who facilitates or completes the
AAC evaluation. Implementing AAC in the schools is the responsibility of the school-based team--which includes the
school SLP--and may include support from an AAC specialist. If the IEP team determines that AAC is required in order
for a student to be provided "free appropriate public education" (FAPE; U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil
Rights, 1996; U.S. Department of Education Office of Special Education Programs, 2006), the technology must be
provided to implement the IEP. The SLP is also responsible for IEP documentation.

According to the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (2004), Section 300.105 on AT, on a case-by-case basis, the
use of school-purchased AT devices in a child's home or in other settings is required if the child's IEP team determines
that the child needs access to those devices in order to receive "free appropriate public education."

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             23/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                     Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Clinicians should consider the amount of support that the child will need to use their AAC system within the school

(classroom, lunchroom, hallways, play and leisure activities, etc.) and outside the school setting when working with

school-age children who use AAC. Vocabulary selection should give the individual access to the general education

curriculum along with access to and use of vocabulary for social communication, functional needs, and support for

ongoing language development.

Transitional and Postsecondary Educational Settings

The transition from adolescence to young adulthood can be challenging. The challenges associated with AAC use can
present added barriers to success in postsecondary educational or vocational training programs, employment settings,
and independent or semi-independent living situations. SLPs are involved in transition planning and may be involved in
other support services beyond high school. Support for transitioning individuals who use AAC includes

transition planning,
disability support services,
vocational support services,
housing assistance,
support for community integration, and
ensuring access to AAC systems after leaving the postsecondary setting.

See ASHA's Practice Portal page on Transitioning Youth for more information.

Adult Outpatient Setting

Special considerations should be made when evaluating and treating adults as AAC choice may be highly contextual.
Temporary needs versus progressive needs should be considered. For example, an adult with a temporary need for a
ventilator after a traumatic brain injury may have significantly different communication needs from somebody with a
progressive disease (e.g., ALS).

When working with adults who are using AAC, the SLP considers

       when the individual started using AAC;
       the individual's comfort level with technology;
       the individual's literacy skills prior to and after the injury or progression of the disease;
       if the individual is using AAC for the first time; and
       the individual's skills in areas such as language, cognition, and motor abilities prior to becoming an AAC user.

These factors may affect the individual's acceptance of AAC, their desire and ability to return to or enter the workforce,
any accommodations that may be needed, and the need for communication partner training.

The following factors should be considered when facilitating transition and selecting an appropriate AAC system:

       ability of the AAC system to incorporate vocabulary for various settings (e.g., medical, leisure, recreational,
       vocational)
       need for strategies to support partner-dependent and independent communication (e.g., written choice or visual
       supports)
       vocational training as well as intervention and acceptance of AAC in employment setting
       concerns regarding device ownership following school-based intervention, as applicable
       considerations for work-related communication (e.g., conference calls, e-mails, etc.)
       accessibility of work (or other) environment

Acute Care Setting

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             24/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                      Augmentative and Alternative Communication

In the acute care setting, the SLP works as part of a team that often includes doctors, nursing staff, physical and

occupational therapists, case managers, family members, and caregivers. Many acute care facilities have AAC tool kits

for use in acute care settings, and clinicians are encouraged to consult with the treating facility or to consider creating a

tool kit. Please see Patient-Provider Communication for an example of such a tool kit.

Important considerations for this population include

fluctuating physical, cognitive, and linguistic abilities due to medication side effects, pain, arousal/alertness, and
acuity of illness;
positioning and access to AAC from hospital bed;
vocabulary that allows the individual to participate in their medical care by expressing basic wants and needs,
indicating refusal or rejection, advocating for basic needs, and expressing preferences related to medical care;
motor deficits (temporary and chronic); and
education of SLPs in the acute care setting to provide this service and educate doctors, nurses, and other allied
health professionals.

Telepractice

Effective AAC assessment via telepractice is a complex process. Refer to guidance from your state, employer, or school
district. Some considerations for AAC evaluation include

       the availability of system components to be trialed for both the clinician and the client;
       the availability of not only a facilitator but also instruction and training for this individual to set up the device prior to
       evaluation;
       access to cameras (e.g., document cameras, smartphones, tablets) or other methods, which allow the clinician to
       observe the client's interaction with the device (e.g., camera placement over the client's shoulder to show the device
       from above, allowing the clinician to see the device screen and the client's selection);
       proper audio/amplification for the clinician to hear selections;
       the need for interdisciplinary collaboration with physical and/or occupational therapy to establish optimal positioning
       for access prior to or during the evaluation process; and
       the need for trial periods with devices or extended dynamic assessment across multiple sessions to ensure the
       clinician's confidence in system recommendations.

See a demonstration of equipment setup, intervention, and engagement strategies that are applicable to remote
assessment from Special Interest Group 12, Augmentative and Alternative Communication. See ASHA's Practice Portal
page on Telepractice.

End-of-Life Considerations

SLPs often assist individuals with reduced or impaired communication when nearing the end of life. When supporting an
individual with AAC at the end stages of life, the SLP considers

       flexibility of access method as physical abilities change or decline;
       vocabulary selection to ensure that the individual will be able to express their wishes, desires, and feelings; basic
       needs; and issues related to medical care; and
       the individual's access to social networks and the Internet.

The goal of intervention at this stage is to develop communication strategies that will facilitate efficient and effective
communication for as long as possible, including connecting with the outside world via social media, e-mail, and texting.
The expected outcome of intervention is not to improve abilities but to allow the individual to express wants and needs
and to participate in decision making to the best of their abilities.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2                25/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                           Augmentative and Alternative Communication

SLPs should understand the process of dying to understand the emotional and psychological issues faced by individuals

and their family members. The wishes of the patient and family are of utmost importance, and the SLP's role extends only

as far as the patient and family chooses.

See End-of-Life Issues in Speech-Language Pathology for more information.

Barriers to AAC Use and Implementation

The following factors may serve as barriers to AAC use (Johnson et al., 2006; Light et al., 1996; Moorcroft et al., 2019;
Pape et al., 2002):

frustration due to lack of AAC knowledge on the part of the professional,
negative attitudes toward persons with disabilities and the stigma associated with AAC,
AAC potentially symbolizing disease progression,
slow rate and low frequency of communication,
equipment breakdowns,
lack of relevant vocabulary,
failure to consider cultural differences in AAC system design,
lack of support for device use on the part of caregivers or belief that they can communicate effectively without the
device,
lack of motivation by the user and family members or caregivers, and
accessibility due to physical limitations.

Barriers can be reduced if

       the AAC system serves the communication needs of the individual and can be updated when these needs change;
       there is a good match between the device and the user's language, physical, and cognitive abilities;
       there is collaboration with the AAC user, their family, and a multidisciplinary team to incorporate their needs and
       values during selection of the device;
       the clinician provides realistic timelines regarding progress and use of the device that are understood by the user;
       the AAC user experiences communication success with the system;
       the AAC user values the system and has a sense of ownership;
       thorough training is conducted with both the AAC user and the family/caregiver after receipt of the device; and
       ongoing training, including theoretical and practical experience, is conducted for new communication partners (e.g.,
       new staff at a vocational setting).

Increasing AAC Awareness

There are many misconceptions about AAC that may deter an individual or a family member from AAC use. Advocacy
and/or counseling efforts are critical to informing these potential AAC users, as well as professionals key to AAC
implementation (e.g., SLPs, teachers, applied behavior analysis therapists). Potential AAC users may believe that AAC
reduces motivation to improve natural speech and delays language development. However, AAC use may help improve
natural speech when used in a multimodal approach (Millar et al., 2006; Sedey et al., 1991).

Consumers and professionals may think that young children are not ready for AAC until they reach school age. However,
early AAC use can help develop speech and language (Lüke, 2014; Romski et al., 2010; Wright et al., 2013) and can
increase vocabulary for children with developmental delays aged 3 years and younger (Romski et al., 2015). AAC use in
preschool-age children may also increase use of multisymbol utterances and grammar development (Binger & Light,
2007; L. Harris et al., 1996; see Romski et al., 2015, for a review), and AAC may improve receptive vocabulary in young
children (Brady, 2000; Drager et al., 2006).

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2            26/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Caregivers and professionals may think that cognitive skills such as demonstrating communicative intent and

understanding cause and effect are prerequisite to AAC use. However, impaired cognition does not preclude

communication (Cress & Marvin, 2003; Zangari & Kangas, 1997). AAC may help children with complex communication

needs develop functional communication, cognitive, literacy, and social communication skills (Drager et al., 2010).

Reimbursement and Funding

SLPs who provide AAC services should be familiar with funding options, including knowledge of public and private funding
sources, how funding is determined, and how advocacy may affect funding. Low-tech or light-tech AAC systems are
typically created by an SLP and do not typically require or qualify for additional amounts of funding.

SGDs are considered durable medical equipment (DME), and funding by third-party payers can vary. SLPs will need to
verify coverage based on their client's specific needs and insurance. The SLP must justify that the device being ordered is
medically necessary in order to receive third-party funding. A payer may require that an SLP consider multiple SGDs
during their evaluation process and that those devices must not be from the same manufacturer or product line. SGD
vendors may be able to assist with funding questions and may have templates for meeting payer standards; however, this
does not take the place of a comprehensive AAC evaluation.

SLPs writing AAC evaluations and completing funding requests must disclose any financial relationships that they have
with device manufacturers and must certify that their recommendation for device selection is based on a comprehensive
evaluation and preferred practice patterns and is not due to any financial incentive.

The Assistive Technology Act

The Assistive Technology Act (AT Act) of 2004 provides every state and territory with federal funding to support efforts to
increase access to, and acquisition of, AT devices and services (Assistive Technology Act, 2004). Find your state's AT Act
program at the National Assistive Technology Act Technical Assistance and Training (AT3) Center - Program Directory.
For more information about the AT Act, go to National Assistive Technology Act Technical Assistance and Training (AT3)
Center - AT Act Information.

Insurance Information

Medicare

Please see Local Coverage Determinations by State Index for further information. See ASHA's Medicare Coverage Policy
on Speech-Generating Devices as well as guidelines from CMS. Medicare rules are subject to change. Medicare may not
cover AAC devices in all settings (e.g., skilled nursing facilities, hospice). SLPs work with their patients and facilities to
provide appropriate services to their areas of need.

Medicaid
Refer to the Medicaid Guidelines for your state.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (2010), commonly called the Affordable Care Act of 2010, prohibits
disability-based discrimination in insurance policies for essential health benefits, which often includes SGDs.

Private Insurance Plans
There is significant variability in funding of AAC devices between different plans and companies. Each is different, and an
SLP should check with the provider before beginning the process of obtaining a dedicated AAC device (e.g., SGD).

Funding for Tablets, Apps, and Computers

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2        27/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM         Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Tablets, apps, and computers are considered nondurable, nondedicated devices, and payers' coverage for these devices

varies. SLPs need to verify coverage with the individual's insurance, based on that individual's specific plan and

coverage.

Funding for Telecommunication Equipment

Technology to assist with communication over the phone may be covered by a state's telecommunication equipment
distribution program. Eligibility may vary state-to-state. A listing of these programs is available at TEDPA
Telecommunications Equipment Distribution Program Association.

For individuals who are deaf-blind, the federally funded I Can Connect program provides eligible individuals with devices
necessary for distance-related communication (including computers and software), as well as evaluation and training on
the equipment.

Funding for Accessories

As with SGDs, an SLP should document medical necessity for accessories. A team-based approach is suggested when
considering appropriate accessories, particularly with considerations from physical therapy and occupational therapy.
Accessories that may support an AAC user include the following:

case
keyboard
mouse
keyguard
stylus
amplification
joystick/trackball
mount/stand

Resources

ASHA Resources

       ASHA AAC Information for the Public
       Health Care Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) Level II Codes: AAC and Other Speech-Language
       Pathology Related Devices
       High-Tech AAC for Spanish Speakers
       Medicare Coverage Policy on Speech-Generating Devices
       National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons With Severe Disabilities (NJC)
       An Overview of the AAC Assessment Process
       SIG 12 AAC and Telepractice Information
       Transitioning Youth

Other Resources

This list of resources is not exhaustive and the inclusion of any specific resource does not imply endorsement from ASHA.

Advocacy/Education

       CommunicationFIRST
       International Society for Augmentative and Alternative Communication

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2            28/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                Augmentative and Alternative Communication

National Parent Center on Transition and Employment

Orange Effect Foundation

Patient-Provider Communication

Project Core

Assessment

       AAC at the University of Washington
       Association of Assistive Technology Act Programs
       Communication Matrix
       Communication Supports Inventory­Children & Youth (CSI-CY)
       Family Impact of Assistive Technology Scale for Augmentative and Alternative Communication Systems (FIATS-
       AAC)
       Feature Matching Comparison Chart [PDF]
       Tobii Dynavox Dynamic AAC Goals Grid 2

Intervention

       AAC Language Lab
       Dynamic Learning Maps Professional Development
       LAMP (Center for AAC/Autism)
       Minspeak
       Model Talker
       Pennsylvania Training and Technical Assistance Network (PaTTAN)
       PrAACtical AAC
       Talking with Tech
       Tele-AAC Resolution

Related Organizations

       AAC-RERC
       ALS Association
       American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD)
       Assistive Technology Industry Association (ATIA)
       The Center for AAC & Autism
       CommunicationFIRST
       Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of America (RESNA)
       Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on AAC
       TASH
       Team Gleason
       United States Society for AAC (USSAAC)

Other

       Boston Children's Hospital Augmentative Communication Program Handouts and Resources
       Institute for Matching Person and Technology, Inc.
       The Participation Model for Augmentative and Alternative Communication [PDF]
       Talking Mats

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2    29/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

  References

Adamson, L. B., Romski, M. A., Deffebach, K., & Sevcik, R. A. (1992). Symbol vocabulary and the focus of conversations:
Augmenting language development for youth with mental retardation. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35(6),
1333­1343. https://doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3506.1333

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2016). Scope of practice in speech-language pathology [Scope of
practice]. https://www.asha.org/policy/sp2016-00343/

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2018a). Facilitated communication [Position
statement]. https://www.asha.org/policy/ps2018-00352/

American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2018b). Rapid prompting method [Position
statement]. https://www.asha.org/policy/ps2018-00351/

Andzik, N. R., Schaefer, J. M., Nichols, R. T., & Chung, Y.-C. (2018). National survey describing and quantifying students
with communication needs. Developmental Neurorehabilitation, 21(1), 40­47.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17518423.2017.1339133

Angelo, D., Jones, S., & Kokoska, S. (1995). Family perspective on augmentative and alternative communication:
Families of young children. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 11(3), 193­201.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619512331277319

Assistive Technology Act of 2004, Pub. L. No. 108-364, 118 Stat. 1707 (2004).

Autism Spectrum Australia. (2013). Evaluation of the Language Acquisition through Motor Planning (LAMP) program with
children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Aspect Research Insights, 6, 1­4.
https://www.liberator.co.uk/media/wysiwyg/Documents/Autism_Spectrum_LAMP_Research_Report.pdf [PDF]

Bailey, R. L., Parette, H. P., Jr., Stoner, J. B., Angell, M. E., & Carroll, K. (2006). Family members' perceptions of
augmentative and alternative communication device use. Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 37(1),
50­60. https://doi.org/10.1044/0161-1461(2006/006)

Barker, R. M., Saunders, K. J., & Brady, N. C. (2012). Reading instruction for children who use AAC: Considerations in the
pursuit of generalizable results. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 28(3), 160­170.
https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2012.704523

Beukelman, D. R., & Light, J. C. (2020). Augmentative & alternative communication: Supporting children and adults with
complex communication needs (5th ed.). Brookes.

Beukelman, D. R., McGinnis, J., & Morrow, D. (1991). Vocabulary selection in augmentative and alternative
communication. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 7(3), 171­185.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619112331275883

Beukelman, D. R., & Mirenda, P. (2013). Augmentative & alternative communication: Supporting children and adults with
complex communication needs (4th ed.). Brookes.

Binger, C., & Light, J. (2007). The effect of aided AAC modeling on the expression of multi-symbol messages by
preschoolers who use AAC. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 23(1), 30­43.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610600807470

Blockberger, S., & Johnston, J. (2003). Grammatical morphology acquisition by children with complex communication
needs. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 19(4), 207­221. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610310001598233

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  30/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Blockberger, S., & Sutton, A. (2003). Towards linguistic competence: The language experiences and knowledge of

children with extremely limited speech. In J. Light, D. Beukelman, & J. Reichle (Eds.), Communication competence for

individuals who use AAC (pp. 63­106). Brookes.

Boenisch, J., & Soto, G. (2015). The oral core vocabulary of typically developing English speaking school-aged children:
Implications for AAC practice. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 31(1), 77­84.
https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2014.1001521

Brady, N. C. (2000). Improved comprehension of object names following voice output communication aid use: Two case
studies. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 16(3), 197­204. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610012331279054

Brady, N. C., Bruce, S., Goldman, A., Erickson, K., Mineo, B., Ogletree, B. T., Paul, D., Romski, M., Sevcik, R., Siegel, E.,
Schoonover, J., Snell, M., Sylvester, L., & Wilkinson, K. (2016). Communication services and supports for individuals with
severe disabilities: Guidance for assessment and intervention. American Journal on Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities, 121(2), 121­138. https://doi.org/10.1352/1944-7558-121.2.121

Brown, M. N., Grames, L. M., & Skolnick, G. B. (2021). Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) use among
patients followed by a multidisciplinary cleft and craniofacial team. The Cleft Palate­Craniofacial Journal, 58(3), 324­331.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1055665620947606

Calculator, S. N. (2009). Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) and inclusive education for students with the
most severe disabilities. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 13(1), 93­113.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13603110701284656

Carr, E., & Durand, M. (1985). Reducing behavior problems through functional communication training. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 18(2), 111­126. https://doi.org/10.1901/jaba.1985.18-111

Costello, J. M. (2011/2016). Message banking, voice banking and legacy messages [Message banking examples from
people with ALS]. Boston Children's Hospital. https://www.childrenshospital.org/~/media/centers-and-
services/programs/a_e/augmentative-communication-program/messagebankdefinitionsandvocab201613.ashx?la=en

Creer, S., Enderby, P., Judge, S., & John, A. (2016). Prevalence of people who could benefit from augmentative and
alternative communication (AAC) in the UK: Determining the need. International Journal of Language & Communication
Disorders, e51(6), 639­653. https://doi.org/10.1111/1460-6984.12235

Cress, C. J., & Marvin, C. A. (2003). Common questions about AAC services in early intervention. Augmentative and
Alternative Communication, 19(4), 254­272. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610310001598242

Dark, L., & Balandin, S. (2007). Prediction and selection of vocabulary for two leisure activities. Augmentative and
Alternative Communication, 23(4), 288­299. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610601152140

Dietz, A., Wallace, S. E., & Weissling, K. (2020). Revisiting the role of augmentative and alternative communication in
aphasia rehabilitation. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 29(2), 909­913.
https://doi.org/10.1044/2019_AJSLP-19-00041

Drager, K. D. R., Light, J., & McNaughton, D. (2010). Effects of AAC interventions on communication and language for
young children with complex communication needs. Journal of Pediatric Rehabilitation Medicine: An Interdisciplinary
Approach, 3(4), 303­310. https://doi.org/10.3233/PRM-2010-0141

Drager, K. D. R., Light, J., Speltz, J., Fallon, K., & Jeffries, L. (2003). The performance of typically developing 2½-year-
olds on dynamic display AAC technologies with different system layouts and language organizations. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 46(2), 298­312. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2003/024)

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2           31/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Drager, K. D. R., Postal, V. J., Carroulus, L., Castellano, M., Gagliano, C., & Glynn, J. (2006). The effect of aided

language modeling on symbol comprehension and production in 2 preschoolers with autism. American Journal of

Speech-Language Pathology, 15(2), 112­125. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2006/012)

Dukhovny, E., & Kelly, E. B. (2015). Practical resources for provision of services to culturally and linguistically diverse
users of AAC. Perspectives on Communication Disorders and Sciences in Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CLD)
Populations, 22(1), 25­39. https://doi.org/10.1044/cds22.1.25

Elliott, E., Newton, J., Rewaj, P., Gregory, J. M., Tomarelli, L., Colville, S., Chandran, S., Pal, S., & CARE-MND
Consortium. (2020). An epidemiological profile of dysarthria incidence and assistive technology use in the living
population of people with MND in Scotland. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration, 21(1­2),
116­122. https://doi.org/10.1080/21678421.2019.1672748

Elsahar, Y., Hu, S., Bouazza-Marouf, K., Kerr, D., & Mansor, A. (2019). Augmentative and alternative communication
(AAC) advances: A review of configurations for individuals with a speech disability. Sensors, 19(8), 1911.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s19081911

Erickson, K. A., Koppenhaver, D. A., & Cunningham, J. W. (2006). Balanced reading intervention and assessment in
augmentative communication. In R. J. McCauley, M. E. Fey, & R. Gillam (Eds.), Treatment of language disorders in
children (pp. 309­346). Brookes.

Flippin, M., Reszka, S., & Watson, L. R. (2010). Effectiveness of the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS)
on communication and speech for children with autism spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 19(2), 178­195. https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2010/09-0022)

Freeman-Sanderson, A., Morris, K., & Elkins, M. (2019). Characteristics of patient communication and prevalence of
communication difficulty in the intensive care unit: An observational study. Australian Critical Care, 32(5), 373­377.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aucc.2018.09.002

Fuller, D., & Lloyd, L. (1991). Toward a common usage of iconicity terminology. Augmentative and Alternative
Communication, 7(3), 215­220. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619112331275913

Funke, A., Spittel, S., Grehl, T., Grosskreutz, J., Kettemann, D., Petri, S., Weyen, U., Weydt, P., Dorst, J., Ludolph, A. C.,
Baum, P., Oberstadt, M., Jordan, B., Hermann, A., Wolf, J., Boentert, M., Walter, B., Gajewski, N., Maier, A., ...Meyer, T.
(2018). Provision of assistive technology devices among people with ALS in Germany: A platform-case management
approach. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration, 19(5­6), 1­9.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21678421.2018.1431786

Glennen, S. L. (1997). Augmentative and alterative communication systems. In S. L. Glennen & D. C. DeCoste (Eds.),
Handbook of augmentative and alternative communication (pp. 59­96). Singular.

Goossens, C. (1992). Engineering the preschool environment for interactive symbolic communication: 18 months to 5
years developmentally. Southeast Augmentative Communication Conference Publications.

Harris, L., Doyle, E. S., & Haaf, R. (1996). Language treatment approach for users of AAC: Experimental single-subject
investigation. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 12(4), 230­243.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619612331277698

Harris, M. D., & Reichle, J. (2004). The impact of aided language stimulation on symbol comprehension and production in
children with moderate cognitive disabilities. American Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 13(2), 155­167.
https://doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2004/016)

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2              32/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                     Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Harris, O. (2015). A cultural basis to develop strong advocates for client and family involvement in the speech-generated

device evaluation and funding process. Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 24(4), 142­146.

https://doi.org/10.1044/aac24.4.142

Hart, J. E., & Whalon, K. J. (2008). Promote academic engagement and communication of students with autism spectrum
disorder in inclusive settings. Intervention in School and Clinic, 44(2), 116­120.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1053451207310346

Hetzroni, O. E. (2004). AAC and literacy. Disability and Rehabilitation, 26(21­22), 1305­1312.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09638280412331280334

Hill, K., & Corsi, V. (2012). Role of speech-language pathologists in assistive technology assessments. In S. Federici & M.
J. Scherer (Eds.), Assistive technology assessment handbook (pp. 301­327). CRC Press.

Hodgdon, L. Q. (1995). Solving social-behavioral problems through the use of visually supported communication. In K. A.
Quill (Ed.), Teaching children with autism: Strategies to enhance communication and socialization (pp. 265­286). Delmar.

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act of 2004, 20 U.S.C. § 300.105, Assistive Technology.
http://idea.ed.gov/explore/view/p/%2Croot%2Cregs%2C300%2CB%2C300%252E105%2C

Jenkins, K., & Rojas, R. (2020). Developing cultural competence from a Funds of Knowledge framework: Ethnographic
interviewing revisited. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 5(6), 1683­1686.
https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_PERSP-20-00081

Johnson, J. M., Inglebret, E., Jones, C., & Ray, J. (2006). Perspectives of speech-language pathologists regarding
success versus abandonment of AAC. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 22(2), 85­99.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610500483588

Johnston, S. S., Reichle, J., Feeley, K. M., & Jones, E. A. (2012). AAC strategies for individuals with moderate to severe
disabilities. Brookes.

Judge, S., Enderby, P., Creer, S., & John, A. (2017). Provision of powered communication aids in the United Kingdom.
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 33(3), 181­187. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434618.2017.1347960

Kaiser, A. P., Yoder, P. J., & Keetz, A. (1992). Evaluating milieu teaching. In S. F. Warren & J. Reichle (Eds.), Causes and
effects in communication and language intervention (pp. 9­47). Brookes.

Kasari, C., Kaiser, A., Goods, K., Nietfeld, J., Mathy, P., Landa, R., Murphy, S., & Almirall, D. (2014). Communication
interventions for minimally verbal children with autism: A sequential multiple assignment randomized trial. Journal of the
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(6), 635­646. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2014.01.019

Kent-Walsh, J., & Binger, C. (2009). Addressing the communication demands of the classroom for beginning
communicators and early language users. In G. Soto & C. Zangari (Eds.), Practically speaking: Language, literacy and
academic development for students with AAC needs (pp. 143­172). Brookes.

Kent-Walsh, J., & McNaughton, D. (2005). Communication partner instruction in AAC: Present practices and future
directions. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 21(3), 195­204. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610400006646

Kristoffersson, E., Sandber, A. G., & Holck, P. (2020). Communication ability and communication methods in children with
cerebral palsy. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 62(8), 933­938. https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.14546

Light, J. C., Beukelman, D. R., & Reichle, J. (2003). Communicative competence for individuals who use AAC: From
research to effective practice. Brookes.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2             33/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                              Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Light, J. C., & McNaughton, D. (2012). The changing face of augmentative and alternative communication: Past, present,

and future challenges. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 28(4), 197­204.

https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2012.737024

Light, J. C., & McNaughton, D. (2014). Communicative competence for individuals who require augmentative and
alternative communication: A new definition for a new era of communication? Augmentative and Alternative
Communication, 30(1), 1­18. https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2014.885080

Light, J. C., McNaughton, D., Krezman, C., Williams, M., Gulens, M., Galskoy, A., & Umpleby, M. (2007). The AAC Mentor
Project: Web-based instruction in sociorelational skills and collaborative problem solving for adults who use augmentative
and alternative communication. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 23(1), 56­75.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610600924499

Light, J. C., Stoltz, B., & McNaughton, D. (1996). Community-based employment: Experiences of adults who use AAC.
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 12(4), 215­229. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619612331277688

Lin, S. C., & Gold, R. S. (2017). Assistive technology needs, functional difficulties, and services utilization and
coordination of children with developmental disabilities in the United States. Assistive Technology, 30(2), 100­106.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10400435.2016.1265023

Lund, S. K., & Light, J. C. (2007). Long-term outcomes for individuals who use augmentative and alternative
communication: Part III--Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 23(4), 323­335.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02656730701189123

Lüke, C. (2014). Impact of speech-generating devices on the language development of a child with childhood apraxia of
speech: A case study. Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 11(1), 80­88.
https://doi.org/10.3109/17483107.2014.913715

McGee, G. G., Morrier, M. J., & Daly, T. (1999). An incidental teaching approach to early intervention for toddlers with
autism. Research and Practice for Persons with Severe Disabilities, 24(3), 133­146. https://doi.org/10.2511/rpsd.24.3.133

Mechling, L. C. (2007). Assistive technology as a self-management tool for prompting students with intellectual disabilities
to initiate and complete daily tasks: A literature review. Education and Training in Developmental Disabilities, 42(3), 252­
269. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23879621

Millar, D. C., Light, J. C., & McNaughton, D. B. (2004). The effect of direct instruction and writer's workshop on the early
writing skills of children who use augmentative and alternative communication. Augmentative and Alternative
Communication, 20(3), 164­178. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610410001699690

Millar, D. C., Light, J. C., & Schlosser, R. W. (2006). The impact of augmentative and alternative communication
intervention on the speech production of individuals with developmental disabilities: A research review. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 49(2), 248­264. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2006/021)

Mindel, M. (2020). Talk like me: Supporting students who are African American using augmentative and alternative
communication. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 5(6), 1586­1592.
https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_PERSP-20-00041

Mindel, M., & John, J. (2018). Bridging the school and home divide for culturally and linguistically diverse families using
augmentative and alternative communication systems. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 3(12), 154­
163. https://doi.org/10.1044/persp3.SIG12.154

Mirenda, P. (1997). Supporting individuals with challenging behavior through functional communication training and AAC:

Research review. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 13(4), 207­225.

https://doi.org/10.1080/07434619712331278048

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2               34/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM  Augmentative and Alternative Communication

National Joint Committee for the Communication Needs of Persons With Severe Disabilities. (1992). Guidelines for

meeting the communication needs of persons with severe disabilities [Guidelines]. https://www.asha.org/policy

Nunes, D. R. P. (2008). AAC interventions for autism: A research summary. International Journal of Special Education,
23(2), 17­26.

O'Neill, T., Light, J., & Pope, L. (2018). Effects of interventions that include aided augmentative and alternative
communication input on the communication of individuals with complex communication needs: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 61(7), 1743­1765. https://doi.org/10.1044/2018_JSLHR-L-17-0132

Pape, T. L. B., Kim, J., & Weiner, B. (2002). The shaping of individual meanings assigned to assistive technology: A
review of personal factors. Disability and Rehabilitation, 24(1­3), 5­20. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638280110066235

Parette, H. P., Jr., Brotherson, M. J., & Huer, M. B. (2000). Giving families a voice in augmentative and alternative
communication decision-making. Education and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities, 35(2),
177­190. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23879942

Parette, P., VanBiervliet, A., & Hourcade, J. J. (2000). Family-centered decision making in assistive technology. Journal of
Special Education Technology, 15(1), 45­55. https://doi.org/10.1177/016264340001500104

Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010, H.R. 3590, Pub. L. No. 111-148. https://www.congress.gov/bill/111th-
congress/house-bill/3590

Petroi, D., Koul, R., & Corwin, M. (2011, November). Resource allocation and use of SGDs by persons with aphasia
[Paper presentation]. Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, San Diego, CA, United
States.

Porter, G., & Cafiero, J. M. (2009). Pragmatic Organization Dynamic Display (PODD) communication books: A promising
practice for individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
18, 121­129. https://doi.org/10.1044/aac18.4.121

Potts, M., & Satterfield, B. (2013). Studies in AAC and autism: The impact of LAMP as a therapy intervention.
https://gatfl.gatech.edu//tflwiki/images/4/43/LAMP_Rsch_Article.pdf [PDF]

Quick, N., Erickson, K., & McCright, J. (2019). The most frequently used words: Comparing child-directed speech and
young children's speech to inform vocabulary selection for aided input. Augmentative and Alternative Communication,
35(2), 120­131. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434618.2019.1576225

Romski, M., Sevcik, R. A., Adamson, L. B., Cheslock, M., Smith, A., Barker, M., & Bakeman, R. (2010). Randomized
comparison of augmented and nonaugmented language interventions for toddlers with developmental delays and their
parents. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 53(2), 350­364. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-
4388(2009/08-0156)

Romski, M., Sevcik, R. A., Barton-Hulsey, A., & Whitmore, A. S. (2015). Early intervention and AAC: What a difference 30
years makes. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 31(3), 181­202.
https://doi.org/10.3109/07434618.2015.1064163

Schlosser, R. (2003). Selecting graphic symbols for an initial request lexicon. In R. Schlosser (Ed.), The efficacy of
augmentative and alternative communication: Toward evidence-based practice (pp. 347­402). Elsevier.

Sedey, A., Rosin, M., & Miller, J. (1991, November). The use of signs among children with Down syndrome [Poster
presentation]. Annual Convention of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, Atlanta, GA, United States.

Sutton, A., Soto, G., & Blockberger, S. (2002). Grammatical issues in graphic symbol communication. Augmentative and
Alternative Communication, 18(3), 192­204. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434610212331281271

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2         35/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                Augmentative and Alternative Communication

Tuthill, J. (2014). Get real with visual scene displays. The ASHA Leader, 19(6), 34­35.

https://doi.org/10.1044/leader.APP.19062014.34

U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights. (1996). Free appropriate public education for students with
disabilities: Requirements under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/edlite-
FAPE504.html#:~:text=The%20Section%20504%20regulation%20requires,severity%20of%20the%20person's%20disability.

U.S. Department of Education Office of Special Education Programs. (2006). OSEP policy documents regarding the
education of infants, toddlers, children and youth with disabilities: Free appropriate public education.
https://www2.ed.gov/policy/speced/guid/idea/letters/revpolicy/tpfape.html

van Tilborg, A., & Deckers, S. R. J. M. (2016). Vocabulary selection in AAC: Application of core vocabulary in atypical
populations. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, 1(12), 125­138.
https://doi.org/10.1044/persp1.SIG12.125

Wilkinson, K., & McIlvane, W. (2002). Considerations in teaching graphic symbols to beginning communicators. In J.
Reichle, D. Beukelman, & J. C. Light (Eds.), Exemplary practices for beginning communicators: Implications for AAC (pp.
273­322). Brookes.

Witkowski, D., & Baker, B. (2012). Addressing the content vocabulary with core: Theory and practice for nonliterate or
emerging literate students. Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 21(3), 74­81.
https://doi.org/10.1044/aac21.3.74

Wong, V., & Wong, S. N. (1991). Brainstem auditory evoked potential study in children with autistic disorder. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 21(3), 329­340. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02207329

World Health Organization. (1997). Life skills education for children and adolescents in schools [Programme on Mental
Health Organization].

World Health Organization. (2014). International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health.

Wright, C. A., Kaiser, A. P., Reikowsky, D. I., & Roberts, M. Y. (2013). Effects of a naturalistic sign intervention on
expressive language of toddlers with Down syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56(3), 994­
1008. https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2012/12-0060)

Yorkston, K., Dowden, P., Honsinger, M., Marriner, N., & Smith, K. (1988). A comparison of standard and user vocabulary
lists. Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 4(4), 189­210. https://doi.org/10.1080/07434618812331274807

Zangari, C., & Kangas, K. (1997). Intervention principles and procedures. In L. Lloyd, D. Fuller, & H. Arvidson (Eds.),
Augmentative and alternative communication (pp. 235­253). Allyn & Bacon.

Zubow, L., & Hurtig, R. (2013). A demographic study of AAC/AT needs in hospitalized patients. Perspectives on
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 22(2), 79­90. https://pubs.asha.org/doi/10.1044/aac22.2.79

About This Content

Content Disclaimer: The Practice Portal, ASHA policy documents, and guidelines contain information for use in all settings; however,
members must consider all applicable local, state and federal requirements when applying the information in their specific work setting.

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2                           36/37
5/9/23, 12:11 PM                                          Augmentative and Alternative Communication

© 1997-2023 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association

https://www.asha.org/Practice-Portal/Professional-Issues/Augmentative-and-Alternative-Communication/#collapse_2  37/37
