Objectives and Key Results Draft for Context Engine Team 2023
Change Tracking
Version 1.0 Draft 1
12 Dec 2022
Carl Hagmann
Version 1.0 Draft 2
13 Dec 2022
Benjamin Cortens
Version 1.0 Draft 3
14 Dec 2022
Carl Hagmann




Ultimate Objective: Generate value with Cognixion's language generation technology stack by establishing and executing research and development.
Objective 1: Build high-quality language processing and generating software components 
KR1: Deliver word & phrase completion model(s) and architecture design to Software Engineering that offers similar capabilities to the ASHA language system with improved reliability and accuracy.
KR2: Achieve communication rates and accuracy that exceed existing AAC language systems 
KR3: Create a basic AWS API infrastructure and documentation for training and fine-tuning models 

Objective 2: Develop lines of research at the edge of what is possible (under O-2)
KR1: Patent review board approves at least one patent. 
KR2: Steering committee reviews and approves research roadmap.
KR3: Execute research roadmap on time.
KR4: Experimental plans developed for conducting speculative hi-risk research. 
KR5: List of potential high value research topics identified (with special interest paid to those which will involve collaboration with Biosignals research team).

Objective 3: Evangelize Cognixion technology with collaboration and outreach (O-14)
KR1: Submit at least one paper in 2023 in an ML journal with academic research collaborator
KR2: Publish white paper and give presentation of new NLG/NLP technology internally 
KR3: Attend (or present at) at least 1 major conference on Natural Language Generation / Linguistics / Neurotech / AAC
KR4: Identify external research opportunities, secure a funded collaborator for 2024, and develop research papers

Objective 4: Grow a team that fosters collaboration, stewardship, and diversity (O-4)
KR1: Fully document notebooks and SOPs for non-technical staff to use, owned jointly by all members of Context Engine team. This includes excellent documentation of tools and models as well as on-boarding resources.
KR2: Acquire resources needed to satisfy efforts from technology and research roadmaps - these resources include both new staff, collaboration with existing teams, as well as hardware and software resources
KR3: Ensure current and new members are well-informed on Quality Assurance, Machine Learning pipelines and follow best practices. Best practices documentation is well maintained and easily accessible by all team members.
