How to check if the refund is processed or not? First, log in to your ShopFlow dashboard. Then, select Go to Orders. Then, select the date range. Then, search using email ID, phone number or order ID. So, after getting the order details, click on the name. So, a pop-up screen will be visible. There, scroll down until you find refund history. Then, take that refund ID or payment ID. Go to your respective payment gateway. Search using the refund ID under Transactions. And, check when was the refund initiated. It would ideally take 5 to 7 bank working days for the refund to be credited to the customers. If this bank timeline is breached, kindly contact your payment gateway to get more further details about the refund.

How to get a transaction ID on Cash Free Payment Gateway? Go to Payment Gateway, click on Transactions, click on the date range, go to Filters, in the filters search accordingly Order ID, search with Order ID, Transaction ID, Customer Reference ID, Phone Number, Email ID or Bank Reference Number which would be your UTR. Then copy the Transaction ID, go to Shopify Orders, paste the Order ID in search bar, then you would find the Order ID.

How to check if a payment is successful and order not placed? First, go to your payment gateway. It might be CashRe, Razorpay, PayU or PayTM. From there, kindly use the customer's phone number or mail ID in the search bar of the transaction. Then, check if the transaction is failed or user dropped or successful. If the transaction is failed or user dropped, the amount would be automatically refunded to the customer within 3 to 5 bank working days. In case the payment is successful, kindly reach out to ShopFlow support and provide mail ID, phone number along with payment ID.

How to search for payment ID using Razorpay payment gateway? Login to your Razorpay dashboard, go to transaction, select the date range, then select using email ID, phone number or bank reference number which would be your UTR, then click on search, copy the payment ID, then log into your Shopify dashboard, go to orders, use the search bar, paste the payment ID, you would get the order ID.


to find order ID on your Shopify using transaction or payment ID from your payment gateway. So take the payment ID or transaction ID from your payment gateway. Go to your Shopify. Go to orders. Click on search. Paste the order, paste the transaction ID or the payment ID. Hit search. You would get the order ID. So in case if the order ID is not populated, kindly reach out to shopflow support and provide with mail ID, phone number along with payment ID.



Okay, so we are going to talk about the settings section of shopflow dashboard. In the settings section we have 5 tabs. The first tab is about shop settings. Shop settings is the tab which you use when you first onboard your store to shopflow platform. In this first tab you have to provide your shop URL, then you have to provide your admin API access token which you will get from your Shopify store. There is then a storefront API access token which we will also need. Again this you will get on the Shopify dashboard when you will create an application which will help you to connect with shopflow. That is about the first section. Now we will talk about the second section. Install shopflow on your theme. So what we do in this section is fetch all of your Shopify themes and give you a button where you can install or reinstall the Shopify theme. Shopify checkout on your theme. So Shopify checkout by default won't be live on your store. You have to do this step where you install Shopify checkout on a particular theme and then you can get it live. Now that is the theme section. Coming back to the payment settings. This is an important section for a store which is where you connect all of your payment gateways. At the payment section there are again two sections where at one place you connect all of your payment gateways. In the second place you configure your payment methods. In the connection we today support four payment gateways pay you, razor pay, cash free and paytm. Now each of these payment gateways have different processes of getting integrated with shopflow. Now going to the pay you, when you will click on the pay you tile you will see two input fields that you have to provide. The first one is the API key and the second one is the API secret. You will find these in your pay you developer dashboard. Coming back to the second one which is razor pay. In razor pay you have to provide again API key and secret but the process is a bit different. So instead of providing it to us directly what you will have to do is you will have to click on the authenticate button and we will take you to the razor pay dashboard and that you have to log in with your razor pay credentials there and we will automatically fetch the API key and secret. For the third section which is cash free you have to provide API key and secret just like pay you and there is a developer documentation on cash free docs which you can see to create or get these API key and secret. The fourth one is paytm. Paytm also again has two things API key and API secret which you will get from paytm dashboard. So that is the payment section. The last one is the integration section where we have integrations with a lot of downstream analytics including Google analytics, web engage, Facebook pixel, Google ads, contlo, mo engage, clever tap and abandoned cart webhooks. Abandoned cart webhooks is a shop flow native integration where we create we send webhooks to your internal endpoints. Starting with Google analytics in Google analytics we support the older UA property. You just have to go there and enable this property. For Google analytics GA4 we have to enable it in the dashboard by providing two things measurement ID and API key. To fetch these measurement ID and API key we will have a separate tutorial.