Code of conduct is defined as the principles, values, standards, or rules of behavior
that guide the decisions, procedures and systems of an organization in a way that
contributes to the welfare of its key stakeholders, and respects the rights of all
constituents affected by its operations. All and members of Aspire must follow the
Code of Conduct defined in this manual. Appropriate disciplinary actions shall be
taken in case of non-compliance of the Code. The HR director will ensure that every
employee is given access to copy of the Code of Conduct at the time of joining.
1. Scope of Code of Conduct
This code of conduct is applicable on all parties doing business for Aspire as full-time
employees, part-time employees, consultants and third party consultants.
2. Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations
Aspire and its and members are bound by the law. Compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations must never be compromised. Additionally, employees shall
adhere to internal rules and regulations as they apply in a given situation. Those
internal rules are specific to Aspire and may go beyond what is required by the law.
Senior Management will ensure that:
All employees are aware of this Code:
No employee will be asked to do anything that would breach this Code.
Queries and / or concerns arising under this Code may be addressed to the HR
department.
3. Aspire Core Values
Quality: Aspire values Quality as all-encompassing passion and pursuit.
Commitment: Build and Orient all processes towards the ‘purpose’ and
deliverable to the user.
Cost effectiveness: Build and Orient all processes to Delivering the best cost
advantage and Return on Investment for the client.
Timeliness: Deliver On-time Every time; Understand time costs substantially
more in lost opportunity.
Focus: Comprehend the purpose; Conform to the process; Commit to the
delivery.
Improvement: Perfection is a journey; Every moment is a learning opportunity- to
do better; to be better.
Collaboration: Together we build; Together we deliver; Together we grow.
Delivery: Delivery is the tangible value created - for the client and for Aspire.
4. Conflict of Interest
A conflict of interest is a set of circumstances that creates a risk that professional
judgment or actions regarding a primary interest will be unduly influenced by a
secondary interest. Each employee shall be free of any personal interest that could
influence his or her judgment or action in the conduct of services or affect his or her
responsibility in managing the affairs of Aspire. An employee must not only avoid
situations that give rise or could give rise to a conflict of interest, but also situations
that create the appearance of a Conflict of Interest.
Following polices shall be applicable to all employees of Aspire regarding conflict of
interest.
Employee must be alert to any situation that could compromise the position of
trust the employee holds at Aspire, and avoid any kind of conflict between
6/11/23, 3:54 PM Aspire - Zoho Connect
personal interests and those of Aspire.
Employee may not engage in activities that can cause conflict of interests of
Aspire, interfere with the responsibilities of employees, or damage or misuse the
reputation, relationships, confidential information or other property of Aspire.
From time to time, situations shall arise that are not clear-cut. If employees are
uncertain about the propriety of conduct/ business relationships, the employee
must consult his supervisor or the Head of HR department for guidance.
Employees must ensure that their personal interests do not conflict with the
duties which are owed to Aspire or which Aspire owes to its stake holders and
clients.
This includes engaging in any of the following activities without the prior written
approval of the management.
Becoming personally involved in any transaction of Aspire.
Negotiating or contracting on behalf of Aspire with an entity, supplier or a client
in which the employee or a relative has an interest.
Accepting any employment (whether part time, temporary or other), consultancy,
directorship or partnership outside Aspire
Employees may smoke in their personal vehicles and in the allocated smoking
area that have ashtrays.